+++
title = "062"

+++
62 (888)
All Gods
Nābhānediṣṭha Mānava
11 verses: jagatī 1–4, anuṣṭubh 5, br̥hatī 6, satobr̥hatī 7, anuṣṭubh 8–9, gāyatrī 10,  triṣṭubh 11
Attributed to the same poet as X.61, this hymn takes up some of the same themes  as the previous hymn, but in much more straightforward fashion. The Aṅgirases,  who figured in verses 10–13 of X.61, are the subject of the first seven verses of  this hymn, with blessings heaped upon them in verses 1–4. Their lineal descent  from Agni is clearly indicated here (vss. 5–6), while in X.61 it was present pri
marily by implication (vss. 9–10). The Vala myth is treated in verses 2 and 7, and  in verse 3 the Aṅgirases are credited with cosmogonic deeds more appropriate  to Indra.
The “navel” of X.61.18–19 is also encountered in verse 4 of this hymn (loc.  nā́bhā, pāda a). Although some (e.g., Geldner) consider the navel in that verse to  be a truncation of the (supposed) poet’s name Nābhānediṣṭha, we consider it to a  reference to the sacrificial ground or the ritual fire, as in X.61.19.
The first four verses end with the refrain “Accept the descendant of Manu  (mānavá).” Geldner, who believes that the hymn conforms to the story told in  Aitareya Brāhmaṇa V.14 about Nābhānediṣṭha Mānava, considers this refrain to  be a self-reference by the poet and supplies “me” with mānavám as its appositive  (“accept me, the descendant of Manu”). But we follow Oldenberg in considering the Aitareya Brāhmaṇa story secondary and, like many Brāhmaṇa explanations of  R̥gvedic hymns, based on misunderstanding. Given that our poet’s patron is named  Manu (see vss. 8 and 11), it seems more likely that in this refrain the poet is com
mending his patron and/or his family to the protection of the Aṅgirases. The final four verses (8–11) are a dānastuti of this patron, Manu Sāvarṇi, with  the final Aṅgiras verse (7) serving as a transition to this praise of magnanimity.
## 01
You who, anointed with the sacrifice and the priestly gift, achieved the  fellowship of Indra and immortality,
for you, o Aṅgirases, let there be good fortune. – Accept the descendant  of Manu, o you of good wisdom.
## 02
The fathers who drove up the goods consisting of cows and with truth  split the Vala cave at the turning of the year,
let there be long life for you, o Aṅgirases. – Accept the descendant of  Manu, o you of good wisdom.
## 03
Who with truth caused the sun to mount in heaven and spread out  Mother Earth,
let there be good offspring for you, o Aṅgirases. – Accept the
descendant of Manu, o you of good wisdom.
## 04
This one here at the navel (of the sacrifice) speaks to you agreeably in  the house. O you seers whose sons are gods, listen to this.
Let there be good sacred formulation for you, o Aṅgirases. – Accept the  descendant of Manu, o you of good wisdom.
## 05
Just these seers are the Virūpas [/of various forms]; just they possess  profound inspiration.
They are the sons of the Aṅgiras; they were born from Agni.
## 06
The Virūpas [/those of various forms] who were born from Agni and  from heaven,
Navagva, Daśagva, the best of the Aṅgirases: in company with the
gods, (each) is generous.
## 07
With Indra as their yokemate, the cantors set loose the pen filled with  cows and horses.
Giving me a thousand (cows) with cut-branded ears, they made fame  for themselves among the gods.
## 08
Now let this Manu be propagated and let him grow like a sprout— he who is magnanimous in giving all at once a thousand (cows) along  with a hundred horses.
## 09
No one succeeds in taking hold of him any more than the back of  heaven.
The priestly gift of Sāvarṇya spreads out like a river.
## 10
And also two barbarian-slaves to perform service, each with his allotted  (gear), along with an abundance of cows,
have Yadu and Turva (each) magnanimously bestowed.

## 11
Let Manu, giver of thousands, leader of the horde, not suffer harm. Let  his priestly gift come, aligning itself with the sun.
Let the gods extend the lifetime of Sāvarṇi, under whose auspices we,  unwearied, won the prize of victory.
The next two hymns to the All Gods (63–64) are attributed to Gaya Plāta.