+++
title = "063"

+++
63 (889)
All Gods
Gaya Plāta
17 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 16–17
The signature word of this hymn is svastí “well-being”:  in the dative suvastáye it provides the last four syllables of verses 3–14, and its nominative opens five  consecutive pādas in the verses after that refrain (15–16a). The gods from whom  the poet solicits well-being are primarily the Ādityas and their mother Aditi, who  especially dominate the first half of the hymn. Beginning with verse 9 other gods  are also invoked, though the Ādityas keep their prominence. Not surprisingly in  a hymn devoted to well-being, the emphasis is on positive thoughts, though some  worries about potential dangers do intrude (see vss. 11–12). More surprisingly in  a hymn with such a strong Ādityan cast, our potential moral flaws are barely men
tioned (vs. 8c).
## 1
Those from afar who seek to establish friendship, who, gratified by  Manu, (seek to establish) the races of Vivasvant,
the gods who sit on the ritual grass of Yayāti Nahuṣya—let them speak  on our behalf.
## 2
For all your names, o gods, are worthy of homage, worthy of praise, and  they are worthy of the sacrifice.
You who were born from Aditi or from the waters, who from the earth,  listen to my call here.
## 3
Those for whom their mother swells the honeyed milk, (for whom) Aditi,  (like) unbounded heaven, massive as a stone, (swells) the beestings,
those whose gusts are hymns, bullishly bearing, rich in property—
applaud those Ādityas—for well-being.
## 4
Having their eyes on men, unblinking, as their due the gods have
achieved lofty immortality.
Having light as their chariot, snake-sly, blameless, they wear the height  of heaven as their garment—for well-being.
## 5
The very strong sovereign kings who have come to the sacrifice, who,  undeviating, have established their own dwelling in heaven—
seek to entice them here with reverence, with well-turned (hymns)—the  great Ādityas and Aditi—for well-being. 6. Who brings to success for you the praise that you will enjoy, all you  gods of Manu, however many you are?
Who will properly prepare for you, powerfully born ones, the ceremony  that will carry us across difficult straits—for well-being?
## 7
You for whom Manu, with his fire kindled by mind, along with the  seven Hotars, first attracted Hotrā (Libation) with sacrifice,
you Ādityas, hold out fearlessness as shelter. Make easy passages, easy  pathways for us—for well-being.
## 8
The forethoughtful counselors who are masters of the world, of  everything stationary and moving—
o gods, rescue us today from transgression done or not done—for
well-being.
## 9
In the raids we call on Indra easy to call, on the divine race of good  action that releases from difficult straits,
on Agni, Mitra, Varuṇa, Bhaga, for winning, on Heaven and Earth, the  Maruts—for well-being.
## 10
Upon Earth of good protection and faultless Heaven, upon Aditi of  good shelter, of good guidance,
(as) upon a divine boat with good oars, without defect, not leaking,
may we mount—for well-being.
## 11
All you worthy of the sacrifice, speak for us, for help; rescue us from the  crooked ill-going way.
With an invocation to the gods that comes true we would invoke you as  you listen, o gods, for aid—for well-being.
## 12
Away with disease, away with all lack of oblation, away with the ill-met  hostility of the malicious.
Gods, keep hatred at a distance from us. Extend broad shelter to us— for well-being.
## 13
Every mortal thrives unharmed and is propagated with progeny forth  from his foundation,
whom, o Ādityas, you lead with your good leading across all difficult  passages—for well-being.
## 14
Which one, o gods, you help at the contest for prizes, which one, o  Maruts, you help at the contest of champions when the stake is set,
that early-traveling, winning chariot, which suffers no harm, might we  mount, o Indra—for well-being.
## 15
Well-being for us on the pathways and in the wastelands, well-being in  the waters, in the precinct of the sun,
well-being for us in the wombs at the making of sons—well-being
confer (on us) for wealth, o Maruts.
## 16
For it is just well-being that is best on the path forward—that, (already)  rich in inheritance, sets out toward something valuable.
Let it keep guard over us at home and in a foreign place; with the gods  as its herdsmen let it be easy of access.

## 17
In just this way has the son of Plati of inspired thought strengthened  you, all you Ādityas and Aditi.
The over-mastering superior men, the divine race, has been praised by  Amartya Gaya.