+++
title = "064"

+++
64 (890) All Gods
Gaya Plāta
17 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 12, 16–17
Making up for his restrained focus on the Ādityas in the preceding All God hymn  (X.63), the poet Gaya Plāta here produces an expansive litany of almost every god  and goddess he can think of, major or minor. He begins with rhetorical questions  (vs. 1): which god would it be best to address? Having suggested that all of them are  potentially his targets (vs. 2), he runs through a long list of possible individuals (vss.  3–12), sometimes listing the bare name, sometimes offering further characterization.
Only in verses 13–14 do we reach something more interesting. In verse 13 he  expresses his hope that the Maruts will recognize their “common birth” with him,  presumably on the basis of their shared role as singers and poets (on this see also  I.87.5), as they meet at the “navel” (the loaded word of X.61–62, hymns attrib
uted to a different poet). The navel here must be both the sacrificial ground of the  here-and-now and the mythical point of their joint origin, before their division into  mortals and gods. In verse 14 he suggests Heaven and Earth as a model for this kin ship. Perhaps the idea is that Heaven and Earth are not divided, with Heaven taking  the gods’ side and Earth that of mortals, but they work as partners—both being  related to the gods and both accepting the sacrifice of men. In any case the kinship  that the poet has suggested he has with the Maruts as poets he asserts in another  way in verse 16, where he describes himself as a “powerfully roaring poet” (kavís tuvīrávān), the exact phrase with which he identified Br̥haspati, the wordsmith par  excellence of the gods, in verse 4.
The final two verses (16–17), in a different meter from the rest of the poem, are  the poet’s summary verses, both beginning with evā́ “in this way” and both men tioning the poet by name. The second of the two is also found at the end of X.63.
## 1
How shall we contemplate—of which one of the gods shall we
contemplate the name that is good to contemplate, as they listen to
my plea?
Who will be merciful; which one will create joy for us? Which one will  turn hither with help?
## 2
Our intentions are intent (on them), the insights in our hearts. Our  trackers follow their track and fly to (all) directions.
No dispenser of mercy other than them is found. My desires have
fastened upon the gods. 3. (Shall it be) Narāśaṃsa, Pūṣan, Agohya (the Unconcealable), or Agni  kindled by the gods that I address with a hymn,
or the Sun and Moon, (the new and) bright [=full] Moon, Yama in
heaven, Trita, Wind, Dawn, Night, the Aśvins?
## 4
How will the powerfully roaring poet Br̥haspati grow strong, through  what hymn with its well-twisted (ornaments)?
Let Aja Ekapād with the chanters who are easy to call, let Ahi Budhnya  harken to my call.
## 5
Or, o Aditi, at the birth of the skillful one [=Agni] under your
commandment, will you seek to entice here the two kings Mitra and  Varuṇa?
(Or will it be) Aryaman, whose path is not to be transgressed, who
possesses many chariots, who possesses seven Hotars, at his births in  diverse forms?
## 6
Let the steeds who heed the call heed our call—all the prizewinners of  measured pace,
who by themselves win thousands as if at the winning of wisdom, the  ones who have greatly borne away for themselves the spoils in the
encounters.
## 7
Set in front with your praises Vāyu, who hitches up the chariot,
Plenitude, and Pūṣan, for comradeship,
for at the impulsion of god Savitar they follow his will—those of one  mind (follow the will) of him who is of one mind (with them).
## 8
The thrice seven flowing rivers, the great waters, the trees, the
mountains, and Agni do we call upon for help—
and upon the archers in their seat—Kr̥śānu, Tiṣya (the Dog Star), and  Rudra the Rudrian among the Rudras.
## 9
Sarasvatī, Sarayu, Sindhu with their waves—let the great strengthening  ones come here greatly with their help—
the divine waters, the sweetening mothers. Sing their ghee-rich,
honey-rich milk for us.
## 10
And let the mother Br̥haddivā hear our speech, and Tvaṣṭar with the  divine ones, (namely) the Wives (of the Gods), and the Father,
R̥bhukṣan, Vāja, Lord of the Chariot, Bhaga. Let the delightful laud of  the one who labors protect us—
## 11
Delightful to the sight like a peaceful dwelling abounding in food.  Auspicious is the praise invocation of the Rudras, the Maruts.
May we be glorious among the peoples with our cows. May we always  be accompanied by refreshment, o gods.
## 12
The insight that you gave me—you gods, Maruts, Indra,
Varuṇa, Mitra—
make it swell like a milk-cow with milk. Surely you will convey the
hymns on your chariot?1484 X.65
## 13
Surely in some way you will take notice of this common birth of ours,  Maruts?
At the navel where we first come together, there let Aditi establish our  relationship.
## 14
For Heaven and Earth, the two great mothers, the goddesses worthy of  the sacrifice, proceed by virtue of their kinship with the gods.
Both support both (breeds [=gods and men]) with their supports, and  with the Fathers they sprinkle much seed.
## 15
Hotrā (Libation) reaches through to everything of value—as do
Br̥haspati and Aramati [/Devotion], the very admirable.
Where the honey-pressing pressing-stone is given lofty voice, the
inspired thinkers have bellowed with their thoughts.
## 16
In just this way the powerfully roaring poet, knowing the truth, seeking  goods, desiring goods,
the inspired Gaya here with hymns and compositions has swelled the  divine races.
## 17
In just this way has the son of Plati of inspired thought strengthened  you, all you Ādityas and Aditi.
The overmastering superior men, the divine race, has been praised by  Amartya Gaya.
Hymns X.65–66 are attributed to a Vasukarṇa Vāsukra, who is otherwise unknown  in the R̥gveda. But his patronymic links him to Vasukra Aindra, poet of the fiend ishly challenging and immensely clever X.27–29, as well as another poet with  the same patronymic, namely Vasukr̥t Vāsukra, one possible author of X.20–26,  another set of well-crafted hymns. Moreover, the final verse of X.65 (15) and the  final two of X.66 (14–15) mention Vasiṣṭha and the Vasiṣṭhas, and both hymns end  with the Vasiṣṭha clan refrain familiar from Maṇḍala VII.