+++
title = "065"

+++
65 (891) All Gods
Vasukarṇa Vāsukra
15 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 15
The poetic pedigree sketched above gives us high expectations for the hymn, which,  however, begins unpromisingly with a simple enumeration of gods. Nonetheless,  although the style never achieves the same distinction as that of the poet’s putative  relatives, there are many nice touches and twists and turns of syntax, particularly in  verses 2–8, treating the cosmogonic deeds of the gods and the praise and sacrifice  offered to them by mortals.
The hymn seems to begin anew with verse 9, which contains another straightfor ward listing of gods, continued in verse 10. A brief account of cosmogony (vs. 11) is followed by a sketch of the Aśvins’ deeds (vs. 12). Minor gods join the undifferentiated  mass of All Gods in verses 13–14, and the hymn ends with Vasiṣṭha’s summary verse.
## 1
Agni, Indra, Varuṇa, Mitra, Aryaman, Vāyu, Pūṣan, and Sarasvatī, of  one accord,
the Ādityas, Viṣṇu, the Maruts, the lofty Sun, Soma, Rudra, Aditi,
Brahmaṇaspati,
## 2
Indra and Agni, the two lords of the settlement, spurring each other on  mutually in the smashing of obstacles, sharing the same home—
they (all) filled the great midspace with their might, as did Soma,
glorious with ghee, rousing their greatness.
## 3
For by the greatness of these, the great and unassailable, I, recognizing  the truth, rouse my praises for those who grow strong through truth.
Let those who are bringing brilliant bounties (across) the watery flood  grant them to us. I magnify the (heavenly clans) well allied (to us).
## 4
They propped up (the region) of solar glory, the midspaces, the realms  of light, Heaven and Earth, the Broad One, with their might.
Magnifying (them), bringing lovely gifts like strengthening
nourishments, the gods are praised as patrons to the race of Manu.
## 5
Try your utmost for Mitra and for Varuṇa who does ritual service, the  two sovereign kings who do not stay distant in their thought,
whose lofty domain shines by reason of their ordinance, for whom the  two world-halves are two opposing troops in need of help.
## 6
The cow [=offering ladle?] that goes around the (ritual) track to the  appointed place, giving her milk, leading at the commandment (of
Varuṇa), not by choice,
she, being announced, will do ritual service to Varuṇa who (also) serves,  to the gods, and to Vivasvant with the oblation.
## 7
Those ruling over heaven, with Agni as their tongue, growing strong  through truth, sit stroking the womb of truth.
Having propped up heaven, they brought the waters here by their might.  Having given birth to the sacrifice, they clasped it to themselves.
## 8
The two parents born of old, encircling, sharing the same home, rule in  the womb of truth:
Heaven and Earth, who obey the same commandment to Varuṇa, swell  the ghee-filled milk for Varuṇa, the buffalo.
## 9
Parjanya and Vāta, the two overflowing bulls, Indra and Vāyu, Varuṇa,  Mitra, and Aryaman—
we summon the gods—the Ādityas and Aditi (also)—who are earthly,  heavenly, and in the waters.
## 10
O R̥bhus, (we beseech) Tvaṣṭar and Vāyu, who vaunts himself, the two  divine Hotars, and Dawn, for well-being;
we beseech Br̥haspati of good wisdom, the gnawer of Vr̥tra, and Soma,  destined for Indra—we who win the stakes.

## 11
Those of good gifts, begetting the sacred formulation, the cow, the  horse, the plants, the trees, the earth, the mountains, the waters,
causing the sun to mount in heaven, loosing the Āryas’ commandments  upon the earth.
## 12
You rescue Bhujyu from difficult straits, o Aśvins. You gave life to  Śyāva, the son of Vadhrimatī.
You carried Kamadyū to Vimada. You let loose Viṣṇāpū for Viśvaka. 13. The daughter of Pavīru, Thunder, and Aja Ekapad, the supporter of  heaven, the river, and the waters of the sea—
all the gods will hear my words: (they and also) Sarasvatī, along with  insights [/Dhī] and with plenty [/Puraṃdhī].
## 14
All the gods, along with insights and with plenty, worthy of Manu’s  sacrifice, immortal, recognizing the truth,
the Escorts and the Gift-Escorts, finding the sun, should take pleasure  in the sun, the songs, the sacred formulation, and the hymn.
## 15
Vasiṣṭha has extolled the immortal gods, who stand out over all living  beings.
Let them grant us wide-ranging space today. – Do you protect us
always with your blessings.