+++
title = "066"

+++
66 (892)
All Gods
Vasukarṇa Vāsukra
15 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 15
The listing impulse found in the previous hymn is here carried further. The gods  in general, groups of gods such as the Ādityas, Vasus, and Rudras, and individual  gods both major and minor are invoked here, with conventional descriptors and  predicates and with standard prayers for help and blessing. There is little to catch  the attention in this hymn, though it is certainly competently done.
## 01
I call upon the gods of lofty fame for well-being—the makers of light,  attentive to the rite,
who, having all possessions, have grown even stronger, the immortals  having Indra as their chief, grown strong through truth—
## 02
Who, thrust forth by Indra, directed forth by Varuṇa, attained a share of  the light of the sun.
We would set our thoughts on the community having the Maruts as their  troop. In their generosity, they begot the sacrifice as its patrons.
## 03
Let Indra with the Vasus protect our livelihood on every side. Let Aditi  with the Ādityas extend shelter to us.
The god Rudra with the Rudras shall be merciful to us. Let Tvaṣṭar with  the Wives (of the Gods) enliven us for good faring. 4. Aditi, Heaven and Earth, great truth, Indra and Viṣṇu, the Maruts, and  the lofty Sun—
we call upon the gods for help—the Ādityas, Vasus, Rudras, and
well-skilled Savitar.
## 05
Sarasvant along with insights, Varuṇa whose commandments are  upheld, Pūṣan, Viṣṇu, the Greatness, Vāyu, and the Aśvins,
the creators of sacred formulations, immortal, having all possessions,  they will extend to us shelter providing threefold defense from
difficult straits.
## 06
Let our sacrifice be a bull and those belonging to the sacrifice bulls, the  gods bulls, and those making the oblation bulls;
truthful Heaven and Earth bulls, Parjanya a bull, and those praising the  bull bulls.
## 07
I entreat the bulls Agni and Soma in order to win the prize, those two  bulls lauded by many.
Those two to whom the bulls have sacrificed through their sacrifice
to the gods, those two will spread out shelter providing threefold
defense for us.
## 08
The rulers whose commandments are upheld, who bring forth the  sacrifice, heaven-lofty ones, the full glory of the rite,
whose Hotar is Agni, who serve the truth without deceit—they let loose  the waters following on the triumph over Vr̥tra.
## 09
They begot heaven and earth to their commandments, and the waters,  the plants, and the trees belonging to the sacrifice.
They filled the midspace and the sun to give help. The gods clasped
their will to themselves.
## 10
Let the upholders of heaven, the R̥bhus with skilled hands, let Vāta and  Parjanya, (masters?) of Thunder the buffalo,
let the waters and plants advance our songs. Let Bhaga, Gift, and the  prizewinners come to my call.
## 11
The sea, the river, the dusky realm, the midspace; Aja Ekapad,
Thundering, the flood,
and Ahi Budhnya will hear my words, (also) all the gods and my
patrons.
## 12
Might we (all) be Manus [=like Manu] for you, to pursue the gods. Lead  our sacrifice forth toward the east straight to the goal.
O Ādityas, Rudras, and Vasus, of good gifts, give life to these sacred  formulations as they are being recited.
## 13
The two divine Hotars, the first two set in front, do I follow along the  path of truth straight to the goal.
We beseech the lord of the field, our neighbor, and all the immortal
gods, who do not stay distant.

## 14
The Vasiṣṭhas have made speech in the manner of their father, invoking  the gods in the manner of that seer for well-being.
Like pleased kinsmen, coming here at our desire, shake good things
down upon us, o gods.
## 15
Vasiṣṭha has extolled the immortal gods, who stand out over all living  beings.
Let them grant us wide-ranging space today. – Do you protect us
always with your blessings.
The two hymns of Ayāsya Āṅgirasa (67–68) are particularly noteworthy treatments  of Br̥haspati and the Vala myth.