+++
title = "067"

+++
67 (893) Br̥haspati
Ayāsya Āṅgirasa
12 verses: triṣṭubh
This is perhaps the clearest treatment of Br̥haspati’s role in the Vala myth and of  his identity with Indra, the usual hero in the Vala story. As discussed above (see  especially the introduction to IV.50), Hanns-Peter Schmidt (1968) has clearly shown  that bŕ̥haspáti was originally an epithet of Indra in his role as priest and formulator,  a role that is highlighted in the Vala myth—since Indra opens the Vala cave and  frees the cows not with his normal power and violence but with song and correctly  crafted verbal formulae. In this hymn Br̥haspati is credited with the deed, but in  equivalence with Indra. The names are essentially superimposed upon each other,  an equation made more obvious by their positioning: the name Br̥haspati opens  the second half-verse of verses 3, 4, 5, 8, 9, 10, and the more transparent version  of his name, Brahmaṇaspati, is in the same position in verse 7. In the midst of this  sequence, in the middle verse 6, we find Indra in initial position in the verse and  credited with the same deed. The poet could hardly have made their identity clearer.  (The final verse of the hymn [12] begins with the word Indra, here as hero of other  stories, especially the Vr̥tra myth.)
The hymn begins (vs. 1) with the primal finding and production of a true insight;  the unidentified “fourth one” in the second half of the verse probably refers to  the fourth, inaudible portion of speech, or the fourth formulation, which figures  prominently in Vedic speculations on the nature and power of speech (see Jamison  1991: 251–57). The second verse introduces the Aṅgirases, the crucial partners of  Br̥haspati/Indra in the opening of the Vala cave; they too find the truthful word.  The next five verses (3–8) narrate the dramatic opening of the cave and the freeing  of the cows. One notes a certain irony in the poet’s treatment of Vala: though the  cave is first depicted as a fetter (vs. 4) and a stronghold (vs. 5), it is described with  the ambiguous term “guard” in verse 6 (a term as ambiguous in Sanskrit as it is in English), and then with a more sarcastic tone “cow-nurturer” in verse 7 and “cow herd” in verse 8.
The hymn ends with four verses celebrating the god and asking for blessings.  Most interesting in this section is the final pāda of verse 10 (if we have rightly  interpreted it), which alludes to the different poetic skills and styles of the mortal  celebrants.
## 1
This seven-headed insightful thought here, born of truth and lofty, did  our father find.
The fourth one indeed did the irrepressible one, belonging to all men,  generate as he was pronouncing a solemn speech for Indra.
## 2
Pronouncing the truth, thinking straight, the sons of heaven, the heroes  of the lord,
the Aṅgirases, establishing their inspired word [/laying their inspired  track], pondered the first foundation of the sacrifice.
## 3
Along with his comrades, who were constantly gabbling like geese, while  he was throwing open the fastenings made of stone,
while he kept roaring to the cows, Br̥haspati both started the praise song  and struck up the melody, as knowing one.
## 4
With two (gates) below, with one above, the cows standing hidden in the  fetter of untruth—
Br̥haspati, seeking light in the darkness, brought up the ruddy ones, for  he opened up the three (gates).
## 5
Having split apart the stronghold (from front) to back, (having split  apart) the lairs, at one blow he cut out the three [=dawn, sun, cow]
from the reservoir.
Br̥haspati found the dawn, the sun, the cow, (found) the chant while he  was thundering like heaven.
## 6
Indra cut apart Vala, the guard over the milkers, with a roar like a tool. Seeking the milk-mixture with (his comrades) anointed with sweat, he  made the niggard wail: he stole the cows.
## 7
With his trusty comrades blazing, with the winners of spoils, he cleaved  apart the cow-nurturer.
The Lord of the Sacred Formulation reached through to the treasure  with his bulls, his boars, with their hot sweat [/sweating over the
gharma pot].
## 8
With trusty mind begging the cowherd for the cows, they compelled him  with their insightful thoughts.
Br̥haspati loosed the ruddy ones upward, with his own yokemates who  protect each other from fault.
## 9
With our propitious thoughts strengthening him, ever roaring in his seat  like a lion,
we would celebrate Br̥haspati the bull, victorious at the contest of
champions, victorious in every raid,

## 10
When he won the prize of all forms and mounted to heaven, to the  higher seats.
Br̥haspati the bull (would we celebrate), strengthening him—though
each (of us) brings light with our mouth in our own way.
## 11
Make our hope come true, our hope for the conferring of vigor. For  you help even the weakling in your own ways.
Let all slighters be off, be behind (us). You two world-halves, who
set all in motion, hear this.
## 12
Indra with his greatness split apart the head of the great flood, of  Arbuda.
He smashed the serpent. He let flow the seven streams. O Heaven and  Earth, along with the gods, further us.