+++
title = "068"

+++
68 (894)
Br̥haspati
Ayāsya Āṅgirasa
12 verses: triṣṭubh
A wonderful hymn, which takes the fairly straightforward (though artful) narra tive of the Vala myth in the preceding hymn (X.67) and embroiders each part of  it with imaginative and studied imagery and verbal constructions. Most striking  is the blizzard of similes, many having two and even three points of comparison  (see, e.g., 5ab), or with simile piled on simile (see, e.g., 1c), or with complex social  content (vs. 2). By contrast X.67 contains only four similes (3a, 5d, 6b, 9b), each  with only one point of comparison—a number essentially reached in the first verse  of this hymn.
As a particularly elaborate example consider the underlying content of verse  2, whose role in the mythic narrative is simply to state that Br̥haspati reunited the  Aṅgirases with their cows. But this reunion is compared to the ceremony of mar riage and the participants are compared to the married couple and to the divinities  who preside over marriage. (If we understood Vedic marriage ceremonies better,  we might understand the verse better.) In the first half of the verse Br̥haspati leads  the unnamed Aṅgirases to reunion with the cows, just as Bhaga (Fortune or Good  Fortune) leads Aryaman, the “civilizing” god of custom, one of whose roles is  patron of marriage, to the marriage ceremony in order to preside. The ceremony  itself is performed at the ritual fire, and in the third pāda of the verse Br̥haspati is  compared to Agni, under the designation “ally among the people” (several times  used of Agni elsewhere). Just as Agni anoints the marrying couple with milk, so  Br̥haspati “anoints” the Aṅgirases (compared to the couple) with cows. The fact  that the word for “ally” (mitrá) is identical to the divine name Mitra simply intro
duces another complication into this complicated verse. Since, as the next verse  (3) makes clear, the cows are embodiments of civilization, of the social bonds that unite the Ārya peoples, this remarkable verse is not just a poetic tour de force, but  also an assertion of the centrality of social custom.
Another complex simile worth exploring is in the second half of verse 6, where  the poet exploits the ambiguity of two words (páriviṣṭam and ā́dat) to deploy two dis tinct three-term comparisons simultaneously. The past passive participle páriviṣṭam can belong to either of two roots, √viś “enter,” in which case the idiom means “sur rounded, trapped,” or √viṣ “work,” in which case the idiom means “served.” The  verb ā́dat can belong to √dā “give,” with preverb ā́, in which case the idiom means  “take,” or to √ad “eat.” Combining these possibilities, we can interpret the image  as that of the tongue worrying food caught between the teeth, or as the tongue and  the teeth eating food that has been served. Either image can be appropriate to the  removal of the cows from the cave, though we are partial to the notion of Br̥haspati  winkling out cows from every interior crevasse.
There is no need, or space, to dissect every simile; we can only invite the reader  to savor the exuberance, the precision, and often the everyday nature of the imagery  throughout the hymn and to consider the construction of these similes as forerun ners of the kāvya style in Classical Sanskrit.
## 1
Constantly gabbling like water birds watching out for each other, like the  sounds of booming (thunder) emanating from a cloud,
exulting like waves stiff-peaked (like) mountains, the chants bellowed  toward Br̥haspati.
## 2
(Bellowing) with the cows, (Br̥haspati) Aṅgiras, coming near, led (the  Aṅgirases) together with the cows, as Bhaga leads Aryaman.
As the ally among the people [=Agni] anoints the household pair, he  anoints (the Aṅgirases). O Br̥haspati, incite them like swift (horses) in  a contest.
## 3
(The cows—) thoroughly civilized, providing for guests, vigorous,  cherished, of lovely color and faultless form—
Br̥haspati, having brought them through, strewed the cows forth from  the mountains, like grain from sacks.
## 4
Spraying the womb of truth with honey, flinging (it=honey?) down like a  firebrand from heaven when the chant (sounded),
Br̥haspati, when he brought the cows up out of the stone, split asunder  the skin of the earth as if (just) with water.
## 5
With his light he drove away the darkness from the midspace as the wind  drives the śīpāla-plant from the water.
Br̥haspati, having (just) stroked (the skin/womb) of Vala, as the wind  does a cloud, brought the cows here as his own.
## 6
When Br̥haspati split the feebleness of taunting Vala with his fire-hot chants, he took (the cows) as the tongue takes (food) trapped by the teeth
[/he “ate” (the cows?) as the tongue along with the teeth eats served
(food)], and he revealed the hidden treasures of the ruddy (cows).

## 7
For Br̥haspati brought to mind this very name of these who were  resounding (with)in the seat—(the name) that was hidden.
Having split the womb of the mountain like the eggs of a bird, he drove  up the ruddy ones by himself.
## 8
He caught sight of the honey enclosed by the stone, like a fish living in  shallow water.
He extracted it, like a (wooden) cup from a tree—Br̥haspati having cut  apart (the mountain) with an (ear-)splitting cry.
## 9
He found the dawn, found the sun, found the fire; he thrust aside the  dark shades with his chant [/ray].
Br̥haspati extracted (the cows) of Vala, whose beauty was the cows, like  marrow from a joint.
## 10
As the woods (lament) their leaves stolen by cold, Vala lamented for the  cows (stolen) by Br̥haspati.
He performed an inimitable (deed), not to be repeated as long as the  sun and moon will rise in alternation.
## 11
Like a dusky horse with pearls, the Fathers ornamented the heaven  with stars.
In the night they placed darkness and light in the day. Br̥haspati split  the rock and found the cows.
## 12
This act of reverence here we have performed for the one belonging to  the storm cloud, who keeps bellowing after the many (cows?):
Br̥haspati—for he shall confer vigor on us with cows, with horses, with  heroes, with superior men.
Sumitra Vādhryaśva is said to be the composer of the next two hymns (69–70), one  to Agni, one an Āprī hymn.