+++
title = "069"

+++
69 (869)
Agni
Sumitra Vādhryaśva
12 verses: triṣṭubh, except jagatī 1–2
This hymn is discussed at length and translated in full by Proferes (2007: 40–44),  who calls it “perhaps the clearest example of a tribal fire and the ritual role of the  clans in relation to this fire. It illustrates the existence of a central fire tended by  multiple clans who affirm through it their mutual solidarity, and who see in it the  source of their domination over others” (p.  40). This particular clan-fire is that  of King Vadhryaśva (see vss. 1–2, 4, 10–12), a speaking name with a deprecatory  sense: “possessing gelded horses,” and in fact the fire itself bears the patronymic  “son/descendant of Vadhryaśva” (see vss. 5, 9, 12). The current fire is also con trasted with fire or fires kindled previously (vss. 4–5), and toward the end of the hymn this fire present here is depicted as victorious over former fires, presumably  belonging to other clans (vss. 10–11). Such victories are just an aspect of the victo ries over other peoples that the clan-fire brings Vadhryaśva and his allies, the men  who kindle and tend this fire (vss. 5–6, 9–12).
One curious detail in the hymn is found in verse 7, where various possessions are  ascribed to the fire (here called a craftsman), including “a thousand barren cows.”  The negative connotations of this property are immediately counteracted in the  next verse (8ab), in which the fire is credited with having an abundantly fertile cow  whose flow of milk is inexhaustible, but the great flock of barren cows is nonethe
less odd. It finds its explanation in a semantic pun: just as the triumphant and suc cessful Vadhryaśva bears the name “possessing gelded horses” so does his equally  triumphant and successful fire “possess barren cows.”
Stylistically there is much chaining of phraseology and repetition of syntactic  patterns.
## 1
Auspicious are the manifestations of the fire of Vadhryaśva; his guidance  is valuable; reverent approaches (to him) bring joy.
When the clans that are good allies kindle him at the beginning,
bepoured with ghee he awakens, flashing again and again.
## 2
The strengthener of the fire of Vadhryaśva is ghee; ghee is his food, ghee  his fattener.
Bepoured with ghee, he spreads out widely. He shines like the sun—his  potion melted butter.
## 3
Which face of yours Manu kindled, which (did) the good ally, o Agni,  that is this one here anew.
Blaze richly; take pleasure in the songs. Break out the prize; confer
fame here.
## 4
You whom Vadhryaśva, when reverently invoked, kindled formerly, o  Agni, do you take pleasure in this (new face) here.
Become the protector of our people and the protector of our own
bodies. Guard the gift—whatever you have for us here.
## 5
Become possessed of brilliance, o son of Vadhryaśva, and our herdsman.  Let the hostile intent of the peoples not overtake you.
A rouser like a bold champion, a good ally—I shall now proclaim the  name of Vadhryaśva’s son.
## 6
The goods of the plains and the mountains, the Dāsa and the Ārya  obstacles—you have conquered them entirely.
A rouser of the peoples like a bold champion—you, o Agni, should
dominate those who seek battle.
## 7
This fire here has a long thread and lofty oxen; the craftsman has a  thousand barren cows and a hundred counsels.
Brilliant among the brilliant (gods), being groomed by men, you will  shine among the good allies who seek the gods.1494 X.70
## 8
O Jātavedas, in you is the milk-cow, yielding good milk, milking out  nectar always in the same way, like the two [=Heaven and Earth] that  never dry up.
You, Agni, are kindled by men who receive the priestly gifts, by the good  allies who seek the gods.
## 9
Even the immortal gods proclaimed your greatness, o Jātavedas, son of  Vadhryaśva.
When the clans of the sons of Manu came to negotiate, you conquered  by means of the men whose strength is you.
## 10
Like a father his son, Vadhryaśva bore you on his lap as he served you,  o Agni.
And taking pleasure in his kindling, o youngest one, you vanquished the  former (fires), even though they were greatly arrogant.
## 11
Over and over the fire of Vadhryaśva has conquered rivals by means of  the men that provide the pressed soma.
You burned even the (whole) crowd, o bright-beamed one; as
strengthener you cut down even the greatly arrogant one.
## 12
Here is the fire of Vadhryaśva, the smasher of Vr̥tra, kindled from of  old, to be addressed with reverence.
Subjugate those, whether non-kin or estranged kin, who defy us, o son  of Vadhryaśva.