+++
title = "070"

+++
70 (896) Āprı̄
Sumitra Vādhryaśva
11 verses: triṣṭubh
An eleven-verse Āprī hymn, with Narāśaṃsa in verse 2 (like II.3, V.5), where  some Āprī hymns instead have Tanūnapāt (I.188, III.4, VII.2, IX.5, and X.110).  There are otherwise few deviations from the standard Āprī hymn template, except  that r̥tvíj “priest, orderly sacrificer” is substituted for the standard Hotar in verse  7. The trimeter meter gives more scope for elaboration than some of the more  minimalist dimeter Āprī hymns (e.g., I.13). A  signature word is uśánt “eager,  desirous” (4d, 5c, 6c, 9d). As always in Āprī hymns, the key word or phrase in  each verse is italicized.
## 1
Take pleasure in this kindling wood of mine, o Agni; delight in the  ghee-covered (ladle) in the footprint of refreshment.
On the height of the earth, on the brightest day of days, become upright,  o very resolute one, together with our sacrifice to the gods.
## 2
As the lead driver of the gods, let Narāśaṃsa drive here with horses of  every form along the path of truth; with reverence the foremost of the gods will  sweeten the ritual meal for the gods.
## 3
The sons of Manu, offering oblations, time and again solemnly invoke Agni to act as messenger:
“With the best-conveying horses and with a smoothly rolling chariot,  convey the gods here. Sit down here as our Hotar.”
## 4
Pleasing to the gods, let it be spread out crosswise; long in length let it  be sweet smelling for us.
O divine Ritual Grass, with a mind without anger sacrifice to the gods,  having Indra as their chief, who are eager for it.
## 5
Touch the wider back of heaven, or gape open along the measure of  the earth.
Eagerly, seeking the chariot, o Doors, with your greatness and with the  great (gods) hold fast the divine chariot.
## 6
Let the two goddesses, the handsomely adorned daughters of Heaven,  Dawn and Night, sit down in the womb.
Let the eager gods sit here in the wide lap of you two eager ones who  possess a good portion.
## 7
The pressing stone is upright; the fire has been loftily kindled: their own  dear domains are in the lap of Aditi [=ritual ground?].
You two priests—placed in front at this sacrifice, win material wealth by  sacrifice, as the two who know better.
## 8
You three goddesses—sit here upon this wider ritual grass: we have  made a comfortable place for you.
As in the time of Manu, they—Iḷā, the goddess with feet of ghee, (and  the other goddesses)—take pleasure in our sacrifice and our properly  placed oblations.
## 9
God Tvaṣṭar, since you have attained loveliness and since you have  come to be in the company of the Aṅgirases,
(convey the sacrificial animal) forth to the fold of the gods, as you
know how; eagerly perform the sacrifice, as one possessing treasure,
o giver of material wealth.
## 10
O Lord of the Forest, harnessing it with a halter, convey it into the fold  of the gods, as you know how.
The god will sweeten and prepare the offerings. Let Heaven and Earth  aid my call.
## 11
O Agni, convey Varuṇa here to our liking, also Indra from heaven and  the Maruts from the midspace.
Let them all, worthy of the sacrifice, sit on the ritual grass. Let the
immortal gods bring themselves to exhilaration at the svāhā-call.

The next two very well-known and often anthologized hymns are attributed to  the legendary Br̥haspati Āṅgirasa, with alternative, equally legendary, authorship  suggested for X.72. According to the Anukramaṇī, X.71 is dedicated to Jñāna  “Wisdom” or “Knowledge,” but it is knowledge in the form of sacred speech (Vāc).  (The word jñāna does not occur in the hymn, or indeed in the R̥gveda.) Hymn X.72,  dedicated simply to the gods (Devāḥ) according to the Anukramaṇī, is a cosmogony  focused on the origin of the divinities.