+++
title = "074"

+++
74 (900)
Indra
Gaurivīti Śaktyā
6 verses: triṣṭubh
Although attributed to the same poet as the last hymn and also dedicated to  Indra, this hymn fortunately lacks the challenges that X.73 poses—and in fact  takes awhile to get to Indra. The first three verses simply announce the poet’s  intention to praise the gods and ask them to travel to the sacrifice with goods  to bestow. The last three verses (4–6) turn to Indra exclusively, suggesting first  in verse 4, via an allusion to the Vala myth and, possibly, to the Maruts’ mother1504 X.75
Pr̥śni, the sacrificers’ desire for cows and sons. More praise for Indra follows in  verses 5–6, with the final pāda (6d) expressing the expectation that Indra will  fulfill our desires.
## 01
Seeking to gain (their favor), I pay tribute to the Vasus or to the two  world-halves, by inspired thought or by sacrifices,
or to the steeds that become rich at the (occasion for) winning, or to
those who hear well [=gods] who set the eager one to find good
hearing.
## 02
At the invocation to them the lordly one [=Agni] will reach heaven; with  a mind seeking fame he will kiss the earth,
at the time when the gods, looking for easy passage, will equip
themselves with their own choice things, like heaven (with stars).
## 03
Here is the song for these immortals, who in their entirety long for (it as  their) treasure.
Bringing to success both inspired thought and sacrifice, let them
establish a mass of goods for us, and not by halves.
## 04
The Āyus admire this (greatness?) of yours, Indra—they who will wish to  drill through to the enclosure full of cows [=Vala],
who wish to milk the great (cow [=Pṛśni?]) who gives birth only once but  has many sons, the lofty one with a thousand streams.
## 05
Cause able Indra to help you—the unbowable one who subdues the  battlers,
the master of the R̥bhus, liberal, who (receives) well-twisted (hymns),  the possessor of many cattle who bears the mace appropriate to
superior men.
## 06
When the previous victor won the latest of many, Indra the
Vr̥tra-smasher fulfilled his names:
he appeared as the powerful lord of victory. What we wish him to do,  that he will do.
The next two hymns (75–76) are attributed to different poets, at least the second  quite fancifully, by the Anukramaṇī, but clearly form a dyad (Oldenberg 1888: 236  n. 3). The first is devoted to the rivers, the second to the pressing stones.