+++
title = "075"

+++
75 (901)
Rivers
Sindhukṣit Praiyamedha
9 verses: jagatī
This hymn celebrates the headlong glories of rivers, especially the Sindhu, here pre sented as the principal river into which all the others flow (see esp. vs. 4). As with the hymns to Sarasvatī (VI.61, VII.95–96), this one contains both naturalistic, if  hyperbolic, description of the river (vss. 3, 7) and depictions of her as a beauti ful woman and a prizewinning horse. Especially notable in the hymn is the litany  of river names in verses 5–6, which many scholars have mined for geographical  information.
## 01
At the seat of Vivasvant [=ritual ground] the bard will speak forth your  highest greatness, o waters,
for forth they strode in three stages, seven each time; forth (strode)
Sindhu with her strength, beyond that of the (other) flowing (waters). 2. Varuṇa dug out the paths for you to travel, when, o Sindhu, you ran to  the prizes.
You travel on a slope along the back of the earth, when you direct the  front rank of these moving (beings).
## 03
Her sound takes its place in heaven, above the earth. She sends up  snorting without end along with radiance.
Like rains from a cloud her “rains” thunder forth, when Sindhu goes like  an ever-bellowing bull.
## 04
To you, Sindhu, like mothers to their young, like milk-cows with their  milk do they [=tributary rivers] rush bellowing.
It’s you who lead them as a battling king does the two “seams” (of
the army), when you seek to reach the front rank of these sloping
(waters).
## 05
Here, o Gaṅgā, Yamunā, Sarasvatī—attend on this praise of mine, o  Śutudrī, Paruṣṇī.
With the Asiknī, o Marudvr̥dhā, with the Vitastā, o Ārjīkīyā, harken,  with the Suṣomā.
## 06
To travel first joined with the Tr̥ṣṭāmā, (then) with the Susartū, the Rasā,  and this Śvetyā,
you, o Sindhu, (come) with the Kubhā to the Gomatī, with the Mehatnū to the Krumu, on the same chariot (with all these), with which you go  speeding.
## 07
Straight in her course, mottled, glistening, in her greatness she holds  encircled the expanses, the dusky realms—
the undeceivable Sindhu, busiest of the busy, dappled-bright like a mare,  lovely to see like a beautiful woman.
## 08
Sindhu has lovely horses, lovely chariots, lovely garments; she is golden,  well-fashioned, rich in prize mares;
the young woman is rich in wool [=foam], in sīlamā (plants?); and the  well-portioned one puts on (a garment/plant) increasing the honey.
## 09
Sindhu has yoked her own well-naved, horsed chariot; with it she will  gain the prize in this contest here,
for the great greatness of it invites admiration—it undeceivable,
self-glorious, conferring abundance.
