+++
title = "076"

+++
76 (902)
Pressing Stones
The snake Jaratkarṇa Airāvata
8 verses: jagatī
Of the three hymns dedicated to the pressing stones (X.76, X.94, and X.175), X.175  is brief and minimalist. Hymns X.94 and X.76 have a number of phrases and images  in common, but X.94 is more charming than X.76, with vivid and imaginative com parisons and a light tone, while X.76 is perhaps more rhetorically ambitious, with  some mythological and cosmic resonances, as well as some challenging syntax. The  stones are more often addressed in the 2nd person and with imperatives in X.76 (no  imperatives are addressed to the stones in X.94). This implicit attribution of agency  to the stones becomes more pronounced toward the end of this hymn, where they  seem to supplant the human pressers. The word náraḥ “superior men” is found in  verses 6–8; although the first two occurrences could be interpreted as referring to  humans, the last is a vocative addressed to the stones—which makes it clear that in  the previous two verses the “men” must be the stones as well.
## 01
I stretch straight toward you at the first dawn flushes of nourishment.  Anoint Indra, the Maruts, and the two world-halves,
so that both day and night, in partnership, will make every seat spacious  for us as they break out.
## 02
Press this as the best pressing. Like a racehorse controlled by the hands,  the stone is in (the control of) the presser.
Because it finds the masculine power that is overwhelming to the
stranger, for the sake of great wealth he [=presser] also attains to (that  masculine power), which (comes) from the steed [=stone].
## 03
For it has labored at just this pressing, at its task. Just as previously  (Indra) set the course for Manu
to Tvaṣṭar’s (wealth?), which was flooding with cows and arrayed in
horses, they have set ceremonies upon ceremonies.
## 04
Smash away the demons with their wreckage. Block Dissolution. Repel  heedlessness.
Press out wealth in hale heroes for us. Carry a tune that pursues the
gods, you stones.
## 05
To you, more formidable even than Heaven, swifter working even than  Vibhvan,
more soma-frenzied even than Vāyu, better food-preparers even than  Agni—sing!
## 06
Let the glorious ones clatter for us—let it press (soma) out of the stalk— the stones with their voice, (which is) heaven-bound, heavenly,
when the superior men milk the desirable honey for themselves, making  (Heaven and Earth) heed all about as they [=stones] cross each other  transversely. 7. The stones, the charioteers, press the soma. They milk out the juice of  him who seeks the cows.
They milk the udder, to pour it out. As superior men they groom (the  soma), like oblations, with their mouths.
## 08
You superior men, you have become the good workers who press soma  for Indra—you stones.
Every thing of value of yours is for the heavenly domain; every good  thing of yours for the earthly presser.
The next two hymns (77–78), attributed to Syūmaraśmi Bhārgava and dedicated  to the Maruts, share an unusual metrical structure and a rhetorical scheme.  Although according to the Anukramaṇī the meter is triṣṭubh, in fact in X.77  only the last three verses (6–8) really conform to that meter, and in X.78 only the  last (8). Most of the rest of the verses have eleven-syllable pādas, as is diagnostic  of triṣṭubh, but clear jagatī cadences, an even more diagnostic test. As Oldenberg  has shown (1888: 92–95), most such pādas have an opening of five syllables, end
ing with a light syllable (regularly ná “like”), followed by two heavy syllables,  the first of which seems to substitute for the double-light break usual after an  opening of five. (There is also often a word-break after these two heavy syllables,  seeming to produce a second caesura in the line.) The apparent equivalence of  the heavy sixth syllable with two light syllables introduces a principle of substi
tution or responsion not otherwise found in Vedic, or most Classical Sanskrit,  meters, a principle that only achieves prominence in the Āryā meter quite pos sibly deriving from Middle Indo-Aryan.