+++
title = "077"

+++
77 (903)
Maruts
Syūmaraśmi Bhārgava
8 verses: triṣṭubh (and mangled jagatī)
On the metrical structure, see the introduction just above.
Rhetorically the hymn (through vs. 5)  is dominated by similes, often studied  and syntactically complex ones, with three or four similes in every verse. When the  dense concentration of similes ends (beginning with vs. 6), the meter returns to con ventional triṣṭubh and to conventional hymn-ending expressions of hope for favor.
Most of the descriptions of the Maruts, however contorted their syntax, belong  to the familiar repertoire of Marut characteristics: their stormy nature, their asso ciation with Indra, their beauty and ornaments, their boisterousness. However,  twice they are connected with the Ādityas (vss. 2d, 8b), a group of gods with which  they generally have nothing in common. This connection is puzzling. Thieme  (1938: 158) suggests that their common quality was “caring for the stranger” (if that  is what the disputed word ríśādas, also found twice in the hymn [vss. 3, 5], means).

## 01
Like (the Maruts) showering (rain) from a cloud with their speech  [=thunder], I will shower goods with my speech. The sacrifices of a  discerning one [=poet] are like [=just as good as] those provided with  oblations.
I have praised the flock of them as if praising the Formulator [=Indra?],  who is well provided with Maruts—have praised them for their  worthiness (of soma), as if for their beauty.
## 02
For their splendor the young bloods have provided themselves with  ornaments across the many nights, just as they have made (the
Formulator) well provided with Maruts.
The sons of heaven have taken their places like antelopes; (as) Ādityas  they have grown strong like foals [?].
## 03
Those who by themselves project beyond heaven as beyond earth  mightily, like the sun beyond the clouds,
inviting admiration like heroes of (great) dimension, heaven-bound like  young bloods who care for the stranger.
## 04
At your journey—as if (resting) on a base of waters, as if going with  faltering step, the great (earth) becomes slack.
There is a sacrifice consisting of all good things close by. It is for  you. Like dispensers of ritual delight, come here to those who are  concentrated (on you).
## 05
With your reins [/rays] you are like (horses) hitched up to the  chariot-poles—like light-bearing (fires) at the early brightenings with  your beam—
self-glorious like falcons, caring for the stranger—when (just) launched,  (you are) like water birds, showering (drops) all around.
## 06
When you drive yourselves forth from afar, Maruts, you (come as) the  ones who know of the great enclosure of goods,
of goods to be realized, o good ones. Even from a distance keep hatred  far away.
## 07
The descendant of Manu who, like (Agni) standing up at the ceremony,  will do ritual service to the Maruts at the sacrifice when the chant is  raised,
he will acquire rich vitality abounding in good heroes. Let him be in the  protection of the gods.
## 08
For they are helpers worthy to receive sacrifice at the sacrifices, the best  luck-bringers, by the Ādityan name.
Let them aid our inspiration, (like a horse) that outstrips chariots, as  they take pleasure in the journey of their great (host) and in the  ceremony.