+++
title = "079"

+++
79 (905)
Agni
Agni Saucīka or Agni Vaiśvānara or Sapti Vājambhara
7 verses: triṣṭubh
This hymn begins with a 1st-person vision (“I have seen...”) and in its middle verse  (4) announces a truth, again in the 1st person—though the speaker disclaims real  discernment for himself, while ascribing it to the god Agni. Such rhetorical moves  are typical of omphalos hymns, but the mystery in this hymn seems less profound  than the structure in which it is embedded seems to promise. It is simply the com
mon trope of Agni as an insatiable eater, with a nice twist in verse 6, where the poet  commiserates with Agni for having, because of imagined sins, to eat without teeth.  Although the supposed enigma of this hymn is not particularly enigmatic, the style  is lively and the images sharp.
## 01
I have seen the greatness of him, the great one, of the immortal one  among the mortal clans.
His jaws are alternately opened up and closed together again. Insatiable,  gnawing, they eat amply.
## 02
His head is deposited in hiding; his eyes set apart. Insatiable, he eats the  wood with his tongue.
With their feet they [=priests] collect things for him to eat, their hands  outstretched with reverence among the clans.
## 03
Questing further and further for the hidden place of his mother like a  child, he creeps through the wide plants.
He [=priest?] found him, gleaming like ripened grain, licking within the  lap of the mount [?].
## 04
I proclaim this truth to you, o you two World-Halves: while being born,  the embryo eats his two mothers [=kindling sticks].
As a mortal, I do not discern the god, but Agni certainly discerns afar  and discerns ahead.

## 05
Whoever sets out dry food for him, pours oblations with melted butter  and ghee for him, and prospers (him),
for that (man) you gaze afar with your thousand eyes. Agni, you face in  every direction.
## 06
What sin of omission or commission have you done before the gods?  I now ask you, Agni, since I do not know.
Whether at play or not, tawny (Agni) has to eat without teeth. You
have cut apart (the wood) piece by piece, as a knife does a cow joint
by joint.
## 07
Born in the wood, he has yoked his own horses that face in all directions,  controlled by reins that stretch straight.
Our well-born ally has carved up (the meal) together with the good
(gods); he has come together with (all) his parts, having grown strong.