+++
title = "080"

+++
80 (906)
Agni
Agni Saucīka or Agni Vaiśvānara
7 verses: triṣṭubh
The most salient feature of this hymn is the form of the word agní that begins every  pāda. In the first half of the hymn (vss. 1–4) the form is almost exclusively nomina tive singular (save for the genitives in 2a and 4d), while the second half has primar ily the accusative. As so often, the final verse breaks the pattern: the first trisyllabic  form (dat. agnáye in 7a) is followed by two vocatives (ágne) in the last hemistich  (7cd), a simple grammatical switch that turns the insistently descriptive 3rd-person  cast of the rest of the hymn into a direct, 2nd-person plea to the god for help and  wealth.
The actual contents of the hymn are subordinated to this formal structure.  Most of the first half of the hymn is devoted to detailing the gifts and aid that  Agni generally provides, though verse 3 briskly mentions four mythological prec edents where Agni has aided specific individuals, somewhat in the style of the cata logues of good deeds in Aśvin hymns. (In fact, the only reasonably well-known  figure in vs. 3 is Atri [3c], whose rescue is usually attributed to the Aśvins.) Verses  5–6 establish Agni as the target of all creatures in need. In the final verse (7) the  poet both announces his hymn, produced on the model of the R̥bhus, and states  what he wants in return.
## 1
Agni gives a prize-bringing team; Agni (gives) a hero, worthy of fame,  outstanding through his work—
Agni roams widely through the two world-halves, anointing them
completely—Agni (gives) a woman with a hero in her belly, Plenitude  (herself). 2. Let Agni’s kindling be auspicious and of profit. Agni has entered the two  great world-halves.
Agni propels the one in battles; Agni divides up the many obstacles.
## 3
Agni helped this Jaratkarṇa [/ear of the old man]; Agni burned Jarūtha  out from the waters.
Agni gave freedom to Atri, (who was) within the hot vessel; Agni
brought Nr̥medha together with offspring.
## 4
Agni gives wealth whose ornament is heroes; Agni (gives) a seer who  wins thousands.
Agni stretches the oblation to heaven; Agni’s domains are dispersed in  many places.
## 5
It’s Agni whom seers vie in calling upon with their recitations; Agni (do)  men when hard-pressed on an expedition;
Agni (do) birds flying in the midspace. Agni encircles thousands of cows. 6. It’s Agni whom the clans stemming from Manu invoke; Agni (do) those  born variously from Manu and from Nahus.
Agni (has found) the Gandharvan path of truth; Agni’s pasture-land is  set down in ghee.
## 7
For Agni did the R̥bhus fashion their formulation; to Agni have we  spoken a great, well-turned (hymn).
O Agni, youngest one—further the singer; o Agni, win great wealth by  sacrifice.
Two hymns (X.81–82) to Viśvakarman are attributed to the dedicand himself.