+++
title = "081"

+++
81 (907)
Visvakarman ́
Viśvakarman Bhauvana
7 verses: triṣṭubh
Viśvakarman, the “Maker of Everything” (or literally, “who has the making of  everything”), is the carpenter (vs. 4ab) and smith (vs. 3cd) of creation, who fash ioned the world. But he is also both an ancient seer (ŕ̥ṣi) and Hotar (vs. 1) and a  present companion (vs. 5cd) and help (vs. 7) to the sacrificers, for his priestly work  has continued from the ancient past into the present (vs. 1cd). This priestly work  is closely connected with his creative work. He wins heaven and earth by a sacri fice that he carries out for his own sake (vs. 6ab), and his ritual work is dedicated  to the benefit of the realms he surveys (vs. 5). In the first line the poet speaks of  Viśvakarman’s “pouring” beings “in oblation” (júhvat). It is not clear exactly what  he means by that phrase, but it likely describes a process by which Viśvakarman  sustains the living world through time or continues to make living beings his own.1514 X.81
The phrase must be significant, since the poet verbally recalls it in the last verse,  when he anticipates that Viśvakarman will enjoy the “oblations” (hávanāni) offered  to him. In 1c the description “seeking wealth with hope” refers to Viśvakarman’s  ritual activity, which carries the hope of prosperity for the sacrificer.
The first and last verses of the hymn create a frame for the hymn. In the first  verse, Viśvakarman is both a seer (ŕ̥ṣi) of hymns and a Hotar, who pours oblations  (júhvat). In the last he is the vācás páti- “Lord of Speech,” who “will take pleasure in  oblations (hávanāni).” That is, within the hymn, Viśvakarman begins as the model  of a priest who both speaks and makes offerings, and concludes as the master of  speech and the recipient of offerings, who supports the sacrificers. This movement  from divine priest to priestly divinity exalts poets and priests, who are closely asso ciated with him and whose words and deeds follow his.
One of the stylistic characteristics of the hymn is the echoing of Viśvakarman’s  name through the frequent use of víśva “every, all” (vss. 2d, 3ab, 7cd). Even more  striking is the repeated use of words containing the v-sound also extracted from  his name. Over a third of the words of the hymn contain that sound. Its repeti
tion is especially obvious in 5cd śíkṣā sákhibhyo havíṣi svadhāvaḥ svayáṃ yajasva  tanvàṃ vr̥dhānáḥ and 6ab víśvakarman havíṣā vāvr̥dhānáḥ svayáṃ yajasva pr̥thivī́m  utá dyā́m, two pādas that together have a string of twelve words containing v. The  invocation to Viśvakarman and his presence thus persist even when his name is not  explicitly mentioned.
## 01
The seer who took his place as Hotar, pouring all these living beings in  oblation—our father,
seeking wealth with hope, entered the later (generations while)
concealing the first ones.
## 02
What was the resting place? Which one was providing support? How  was it?—
that from which Viśvakarman, producing the earth, (also) uncovered the  heaven by his greatness—he who has his eyes on everything.
## 03
Whose eyes and face are turned in every direction, whose arms and feet  move in every direction,
producing heaven and earth, he forges them together with his arms, with  his fan(-bellows)—he, the god alone.
## 04
What was the wood? What was the tree?—out of which they fashioned  heaven and earth.
O you of inspired thought [=priests], in your thinking ask about that  upon which he rested, giving support to living beings.
## 05
What are your highest domains, what your lowest, and these that are  your midmost, Viśvakarman—
do your best for them for the sake of your companions at the oblation,  o you of independent will. Increasing your own person, by yourself
sacrifice for yourself. 6. O Viśvakarman, since you are increased through the oblation, by  yourself win earth and heaven by sacrifice.
Let the other peoples all around be left in confusion; for us here let there  be a generous patron!
## 07
We would today summon the Lord of Speech, Viśvakarman, swift as  thought, for help in the contest.
He will take pleasure in every oblation of ours—he who is luck for
everyone, whose work succeeds—to give us help.