+++
title = "083"

+++
83 (909)
Battle Fury
Manyu Tāpasa
7 verses: triṣṭubh, except jagatī 1
This hymn begins with four verses praising Manyu for his might and victory-bring ing qualities and entreating him to use these qualities against our enemies. The  following three verses (5–7) strike a more personal note, with a 1st-person speaker,  apparently deserted by Manyu for some undetermined reason. The speaker begs  Manyu to return to his side, so that together they can smite the enemy.
## 01
Who has done honor to you, o Battle Fury—you mace, you missile—he  prospers in due order in all victorious might and strength.
Might we be victorious over Dāsa and Ārya with you as yokemate, with  victorious might, created by might, possessing might.
## 02
Battle Fury was Indra, just Battle Fury was (every?) god; Battle Fury was  the Hotar, Varuṇa, Jātavedas.
Battle Fury do the clans that stem from Manu reverently invoke. Protect  us, Battle Fury, in concert with Fervor.
## 03
Attack, Battle Fury, stronger than strong. With Fervor as yokemate  smite away our rivals.
Foe-smiting, obstacle-smiting, and Dasyu-smiting, bring all good things  here to us.
## 04
For you, Battle Fury, having overwhelming strength, are self-generated  Wrath, victorious over hostility.
Common to all domains, victorious, possessing victorious might, confer  strength on us in battle.

## 05
Being without a portion, I have gone off far away, because of your  intention, you forceful and discerning one.
Unintentionally I have angered you, Battle Fury. In your own person  come to me to give me power.
## 06
Here I am—yours! Come right up here near to me face to face, o
victorious one who suckles all.
Battle Fury, mace-bearer; turn here toward me—we two shall smite the  Dasyus—and be mindful of your friend.
## 07
Go forth on attack: be on my right side. Then we shall keep smiting  obstacles in abundance.
I offer to you the foundation and the top of the honey. We two shall
both first drink silently.