+++
title = "084"

+++
84 (910)
Battle Fury
Manyu Tāpasa
7 verses: triṣṭubh 1–3, jagatī 4–7
Like the last hymn, this one is a simple address to Manyu “Battle Fury” asking  for his aid in our battles, as well as in the division of the spoils. Rhetorically the  hymn is characterized by verbal chaining:  almost every verse ends with a word  picked up by the very beginning of the next verse. Thus, “fire” in 1d/2a, “alone”  3d/4a, “victory” 4d/5a, “ready to hand” 5d/6a, “pour in” 6d/7a; only 2d/3a lacks  this concatenation.
## 1
Let them go forth on attack on the same chariot with you, o Battle  Fury, you Marut-friend—doing damage, bristling with excitement,
emboldened,
possessing sharp arrows, having honed their weapons—the superior men  with fire’s form.
## 2
Flaring like fire, o Battle Fury, be victorious. Be our army-leader,
victorious one, when you are invoked.
On smiting our rivals, share out their possessions. Showing the measure  of your strength, shove aside the scorners.
## 3
Vanquish hostility for us, Battle Fury. Breaking, crushing, crushing out,  advance on our rivals.
Formidable is your dimension: they have never confined it. Exerting your  will, you lead at will, you who are born alone.
## 4
You alone are reverently invoked by many, Battle Fury. Hone every clan  for battle.
O one of unbroken brilliance, with you as yokemate we raise our
heavenly cry for victory. 5. Creating victory like Indra, without talking us down, Battle Fury,  become our overlord here.
We hymn your dear name, victorious one. We know the wellspring
whence you came to be ready to hand.
## 6
Born together with readiness, you mace, you missile, you bear highest  victorious might, o overwhelming one.
(Born?) together with your resolve, share the fat with us, Battle Fury, at  the pouring in of great spoils, o much-invoked one.
## 7
The spoils, both those that have poured in and those that have been  collected, let Battle Fury and Varuṇa give to us.
Let our rivals, having set fear in their own hearts, defeated, hide
themselves away.
With X.85 begins the series of individual hymns that will last to the end of the Xth  Maṇḍala.