+++
title = "085"

+++
85 (911) Wedding
Sūryā Sāvitrī
47 verses: anuṣṭubh, except triṣṭubh 14, 19–21, 23–24, 26, 36–37, 44; jagatī 18, 27, 43;  urobr̥hatī 34
This first hymn of the single-hymn group, long and episodic, treats the domes tic ritual of the wedding. Many of the verses are found also in the Atharvaveda  (Śaunaka) wedding hymns (XIV.1–2) and are utilized in the gr̥hya sūtras (the proto cols of the domestic rituals) in the wedding rite.
It begins (vss. 1–19) with a fairly coherent account of the wedding of Sūryā,  the Daughter of the Sun, whose marriage serves as the prototype of human mar riage. She is also named by the Anukramaṇī as the author of the hymn, a clearly  fanciful ascription. The bridegroom is Soma, and the first five verses are devoted  to asserting that this is not the familiar earthly soma, the ritual drink (see esp. vss.  3–4), but rather the celestial Soma—here identified for the first time as the moon,  an identification that becomes standard later. The waning and waxing of the moon  are referred to in verse 5, and probably cryptically in the first part of verse 4, in the  puzzling adjective “those whose regulation is sheltering” (āchádvidhāna), using an  idiom otherwise used for the regulation of the months and seasons (e.g., in vs. 18).
The next verses (6–12) employ a style familiar from the Atharvaveda and from  middle Vedic prose, a structured series of identifications between cosmic and every day entities; the everyday entities here are the different features of the wedding, and  especially the wedding vehicle. Much in these verses is unclear for several reasons.  For one thing, workaday language is seldom found in these high-culture texts, and

so the words for the members of the wedding party and the pieces of the bridal  finery and wedding cart are unfamiliar. Moreover, the cosmic comparanda are dif ficult to penetrate as they seem to refer to unidentified astronomical bodies and  movements. Verses 13–16 focus on a single episode in the marriage ritual, the “woo ing.” Judging from later practice, the bridegroom’s party sends several males to  the potential bride’s home, to ask her father and other male members of the fam ily for her as bride for the man they represent. This part of the ceremony begins  with the wooers identifying themselves by name and lineage—the “pointing out”  of verse 15. In this hymn the Aśvins are the wooers, arriving on their characteristic  three-wheeled chariot, whose wheels provide the topic for a series of (presumably  astronomical) riddles (vss. 15–16). (For further discussion see Jamison 1996a: 222– 24.) After a verse of homage (17), this part of the hymn ends with two further verses  of riddles about the sun and moon (18–19).
After this long, more-or-less self-contained mythological and cosmological  opening the hymn continues with verses more appropriate to the current, human  wedding. Verses 20–27 contain a somewhat jumbled treatment of the wedding,  from the wooing to the arrival in the new home, beginning with an invitation to  mount the wedding vehicle (vs. 20), perhaps placed here because it has connections  with the Sūryā section. Verses 21–22 are addressed to a Gandharva (a type of lubri
cious demigod, thought to target unmarried girls), declaring the new wife off-limits.  Verse 23 seems to collapse the earlier journey to the wooing and the journey to the  new home, while the following two verses (24–25) concern the ceremony itself: at  least in the later ritual the wife is briefly bound with a cord, as a symbolic initiation  parallel to the initiation of a young Ārya boy. (See Jamison 1996a: 42–48.) Finally,  in verses 26–27 we reach the journey to the new home and good wishes for the new  mistress of the household.
Verses 28–35 are a strange, sinister, and menacing interlude between the gener ally happy tone of the first part of the hymn and the blessings with which it closes.  These, especially verses 28–30 and 34–35, are also the most discussed and disputed  verses in the hymn. Let us dispose of the relatively unproblematic verses 31–33 first.  These concern the possible dangers of the wedding journey:  diseases emanating  from the spectators of the procession (vs. 31) and robbers and other hazards (vs.  32). In verse 33 the spectators are allowed to look at the bride and wish her good  luck, but then ordered home.
It is generally agreed that the three preceding verses (28–30) have to do with the  deflowering of the bride, though there is much disagreement about details. Verse  28, it seems, begins with the announcement of the blood-stained sheet or garment,  the all-important sign that the bride was a virgin. But the rest of this verse and the  two verses following do not treat this as an altogether positive outcome, especially  for the groom. Because the bride was a virgin, the marriage is valid, so her relatives  are pleased (28c)—but the new husband is trapped. The bride becomes a noose  (like the old sexist American slang expression “ball-and-chain” for a wife), and he is  bound in her bonds. She also becomes witchcraft embodied (28b, 29c). In our view this refers to the unnerving and dangerous hold that sex, in the person of his wife,  will exert over the husband. (Compare American English “that old black magic”  for sexual attraction and desire.) He is not only legally but also mentally bound,  and this hold is also expressed by the paradoxical “the wife enters her husband” at  the end of verse 29. Though the sexual act of course happens the other way—hus
band enters wife—symbolically she enters him: she has penetrated his defenses, got ten “under his skin.” The first half of verse 29 is unconnected with this emotional  transformation; instead it simply continues the legal and social ramifications of the  consummated marriage. With most commentators (pace Falk [1993], who thinks it  is the sable pelt worn by the groom), we interpret the śāmulyàm of 29a as the stained  garment of the bride, now to be disposed of. Pāda b treats the gifts to be given to  the priests who officiated at the ceremony. In verse 30 we return to the groom’s  compromised physical and emotional state: sex, especially this first sex of marriage,  is making him weakened and vulnerable, his naked flesh “glistening in an evil way,”  perhaps with sexual fluids. The theme of the garment found in literal terms in verses  28–29 acquires a somewhat shocking metaphorical twist in the second half of verse  30, where sexual intercourse is depicted as the husband dressing his penis in the  “garment,” that is, the body, of the bride.
After this emotional binge, the dangers of the road in verses 31–33 seem rather  minor! (The journey verses may have been interpolated here because the diseases of  vs. 31 are reminiscent of the groom’s physical state in vs. 30.) But menace returns in  verse 34, where an unidentified object is ascribed all sorts of harmful qualities. Only  a brahmin can neutralize them. Similarly, in verse 35 various violent actions are  depicted, which a brahmin can absolve. Most commentators have considered the  object in verse 34 to be the stained garment of the bride, and the actions in verse 35  to have been performed on the garment to sanitize it. We think this unlikely; instead  we consider these two verses to concern the wedding feast and in particular the  cow killed for the feast. Just as the sex of verses 28–30 involved violence, surrender,  and the breaking of taboos, so the slaughter of a cow to be eaten at the celebration  requires the same ambivalently viewed actions and in a sense is a public representa tion of the private violation of deflowering. But brahmins who understand “Sūryā,”  that is, the nature of marriage, including its negative qualities, can safely eat the  offered cow.
Verses 36–37 depict a far more benign husband than the tortured one of verses  28–30 and one more uncomplicatedly eager for sex. These verses lead into the  famous series (38–41) about the previous, divine husbands of the wife. The final  six verses (42–47) are simply expressed blessings of the married couple and of the  new wife.
## 1
By reality is the earth propped up; by the sun is heaven propped up. By truth do the Ādityas stand, and Soma is fixed in heaven.
## 2
By Soma the Ādityas are strong; by truth is the earth great.
And in the lap of these heavenly bodies Soma is set.

## 3
A man thinks he has drunk the soma when they crush the plant. But the Soma that the formulators know—no one at all consumes that. 4. Protected by those whose regulation is sheltering, guarded by those  belonging to heights, o Soma,
you just stay listening to the pressing stones. No earth-dweller
consumes you.
## 5
When they take their first drink of you, god, after that you swell  up again.
Vāyu is the guardian of Soma. The moon is the model of the years.
## 6
Raibhī was (the female attendant) to be given along (with the bride),  Nārāśaṃsī the in-dweller.
Sūryā’s auspicious garment goes adorned with a song.
## 7
Perception was the pillow, the eye was the adorning salve,
Heaven and Earth were the bucket (seat), when Sūryā drove to her  husband.
## 8
The praise songs were the crossbars, meter the veil and headdress. The Aśvins were the wooers of Sūryā and Agni was the leader.
## 9
Soma was the bridegroom; the Aśvins were both wooers,
when Savitar gave Sūryā to her husband, as she pronounced (her vow)  with her (whole) mind.
## 10
Mind was her wagon, and heaven was her canopy.
The two glowing ones [=sun and moon] were the draft-oxen, when  Sūryā drove to her (new) home.
## 11
Your two oxen, harnessed by verse and tune [/r̥c and sāman], went of  one accord.
The ear was your two wheels. The path to heaven meandered back  and forth.
## 12
The two gleaming ones [=Heaven and Earth?] were your two wheels as  you drove. Breath was hammered in as the axle.
Sūryā mounted the wagon made of mind, as she went forth to her  husband.
## 13
Sūryā’s wedding proceeded, when Savitar set it going.
In the Aghā’s the cows are killed; in the two Arjunī’s she is conveyed (to  her new home).
## 14
When, o Aśvins, you two drove with a three-wheeled (chariot) to the  wedding of Sūryā to ask for her,
all the gods then gave assent to you two. The son Pūṣan chose you as  his two fathers.
## 15
When you drove, you two lords of beauty, to Sūryā to woo her, where was your single wheel; where did you stand for the pointing out? 16. Your two wheels, o Sūryā—the brahmins know (them) according to  their season.
But the one wheel that is hidden—that just the experts know. 17. To Sūryā, to the gods, to Mitra and Varuṇa—
those who are forethoughtful of creation—to them I have made this  obeisance here.
## 18
First in front, then behind, these two roam by their magic power. As  two playful children, they travel around their ceremonial course.
The one [=Sun] watches over all creatures; the other [=Moon] is born  again (and again) as he portions out the seasons.
## 19
He becomes ever new as he is born; as beacon of the days he goes at the  forefront of the dawns.
He portions out their share to the gods as he comes here. The Moon  extends his lifetime long.
## 20
Lovely with kimśuka flowers, (made of) śalmali wood, having all forms,  of golden color, well-turning, well-wheeled—
mount, o Sūryā, the world of immortality. Make your wedding
procession a comfortable place for your husband.
## 21
“Rise up from here, for this woman has a husband.” I call on Viśvāvasu  with reverence, with hymns.
“Seek some other girl sitting in (the house of) her father, adorned (for  marriage) [/smeared (with menstrual blood)]. That is your share by
nature. Know this.”
## 22
“Rise up from here, Viśvāvasu.” With reverence we invoke you.
“Seek some other burgeoning maiden. Send the wife to join with her  husband.”
## 23
Let the paths be straight and harmless to men, by which the comrades  go to the wooing.
Aryaman and Bhaga should lead us all together. Let the united
household be easy to hold fast, o gods.
## 24
I release you from the fetter of Varuṇa, with which well-disposed  Savitar bound you.
In the womb of truth, in the world of the well-performed (sacrifice?)  I place you unharmed along with your husband.
## 25
I release (her) from here, not from yonder. I have made her well bound  yonder,
so that, o Indra the rewarder, this woman here will have good sons,
good fortune.
## 26
Let Pūṣan lead you from here, having taken you by the hand. Let the  Aśvins convey you forth in their chariot.
Go to the house, so that you will be mistress of the house. Exerting
your will you will announce the ceremonial distribution.
## 27
Here let your heart’s desire be realized through children; here in this  house be vigilant for the ruling of your household.
With this husband merge your body. Then (even) as an elderly couple  you two will announce the ceremonial distribution.1524 X.85
## 28
It [=bride’s garment] becomes dark red. [She=bride] becomes  witchcraft, a noose. She is smeared (with blood).
Her relatives are elated; her husband is bound in bonds.
## 29
Hand over the stained garment; to the brahmins parcel out the goods. She herself has become walking witchcraft: the wife enters her
husband.
## 30
His body loses its splendor—glistening in that evil way—
when the husband is about to put on his own member the “garment” of  the bride.
## 31
The diseases from the people that follow after the glittering wedding  procession of the bride,
those let the gods worthy of the sacrifice lead back again whence  they came.
## 32
Let highwaymen who lie in wait not find the married couple. Let them cross over the hard place by easy roads. Let hostilities
run away.
## 33
Of good omen is this bride here: together approach her, behold her. Having given good luck to her, then scatter away home.
## 34
This is rough; this is sharp, barbed, poisonous: it is not for eating. The brahmin who would know Sūryā, only he deserves this thing  associated with the bride(groom).
## 35
Carving up, carving open, and then cutting apart:
behold the forms of Sūryā! But the brahmin makes them clean.
## 36
I grasp your hand for good fortune, so that with me as your husband  you will reach old age.
Bhaga, Aryaman, Savitar, Plenitude—(all) the gods—have given you to  me for the ruling of the household.
## 37
Pūṣan, rouse her, most kindly disposed—(she) in whom humans scatter  their seed,
(she) who will willingly spread apart her thighs for us, (she) in whom we  can willingly thrust our penis.
## 38
To you at first they conveyed Sūryā along with her wedding procession. Give the wife back to her husbands, Agni, along with progeny.
## 39
Agni has given the wife back, along with lifetime and luster, (to him) who as her husband will live, long-lived, through a hundred autumns. 40. Soma acquired (you) first; the Gandharva acquired (you) next. Agni was your third husband. The fourth was human-born.
## 41
Soma gave (her) to the Gandharva; the Gandharva gave (her) to Agni. Agni has given both wealth and sons to me, and also this woman here.
## 42
Stay just here, (you two); don’t go apart. Attain your entire lifespan, playing with your sons and grandsons, rejoicing in your own house. 43. Let Prajāpati generate progeny for us. Let Aryaman anoint (you?) till  old age.
Without ill-omen enter the world of your husband. Be weal for our
two-footed, weal for our four-footed.
## 44
Be free from the evil eye, not husband-smiting, kindly to the livestock,  of good mind and good luster,
hero-bearing, god-loving, comfortable. Be weal for our two-footed,
weal for our four-footed.
## 45
Make this woman here, o Indra the rewarder, possessed of good sons  and of good fortune.
Confer ten sons on her: make her husband the eleventh.
## 46
Become sovereign queen over your father-in-law; become sovereign  queen over your mother-in-law.
Become sovereign queen over your sister-in-law, sovereign queen over  your brothers-in-law.
## 47
Let all the gods jointly and jointly the waters anoint our two hearts. Together Mātariśvan, together the Disposer, together the Director—let  them join us two together.