+++
title = "087"

+++
87 (913) Agni Demon-Smiter
Pāyu Bhāradvāja
25 verses: triṣṭubh, except anuṣṭubh 22–25
A departure from the usual themes of Agni hymns (though quite reminiscent of the  second half of I.36 and to a lesser extent X.118), this long hymn is entirely devoted  to Agni as “demon-smiter” (rakṣohán), the first word of the hymn, and especially  to his violent pursuit of “sorcerers” (yātudhā́na). The language is gleefully and cre
atively bloodthirsty, crediting Agni with a large arsenal of weapons, mostly based  on the shape of his flames, and of means of violent destruction of the enemy (pierc ing, crushing, shattering, disemboweling, etc.). The vividness of the language is  enhanced by the fact that, after the first verse, Agni is always addressed in the 2nd  person and almost always with imperatives. (Only vss. 15 and 18 lack direct address  to Agni, though he is lurking in the background. These two verses are also the only  ones in which any other gods are allowed a part of the action.)
Agni’s connection with ritual is barely mentioned in the hymn. In verse 1 the  poet sprinkles him with ghee, addresses him, and kindles him, in order to ensure his  protection, and in verse 4 it is made clear that the murderous power of Agni’s weap ons comes from the sacrifice and the associated ritual speech. That Agni’s fierce and  aggressive protection of us stems from our ritual behavior toward him should be  kept in mind—though it must be admitted that the poet seems to forget this fact for  long stretches of the hymn.
Lexical repetition and phonological figures, both simple and complex, are  important features of the style of the hymn. To mention only one of the complex  figures, the unusual participle sphūrjáyan “sizzling” (the only occurrence of this  verb in the R̥gveda) in 11c is echoed phonologically by śaphārújam “hoof-breaking”  in 12b (and to a lesser extent by dhū́rvantam “damaging” in 12d).
The sheer exuberance of the hymn is contagious, at least to its translators.
## 1
The demon-smiter—I besprinkle him as the prizewinner; I beseech him  as Mitra [/an ally] for broadest shelter.
Agni, sharpening himself, fully kindled according to (our) intentions— let him protect us from harm by day, let him by night.

## 2
Possessing jaws of metal, (first) brush the sorcerers with your flame, o  Jātavedas, when fully kindled.
(Then) with your tongue seize hold of those who have fools for gods.  Having wrenched the flesh-eaters, stick them in your mouth.
## 3
You who have (teeth) in both, bring both jaws close together, the upper  and the lower, as you sharpen (them), with murderous intent.
Encircle (them) in the midspace, o king, and set upon the sorcerers  altogether with your fangs.
## 4
Fitting your arrows to the bow with sacrifices, o Agni, and smearing  their shafts along with their points with speech,
with these pierce the sorcerers in the heart. Break their arms, turned  against (us), in turn.
## 5
Agni, split the skin of the sorcerer. Let the murderous (arrow-)point  smite him with its blaze.
Cleave his joints, Jātavedas. When he is hewn apart, let the flesh-eater,  craving his bloody flesh, open him up.
## 6
When now you see him standing still or moving about, o Agni Jātavedas, or flying along the paths in the midspace, as archer pierce him with  your missile, sharpening it.
## 7
And, Jātavedas, with your spears recover what was seized, from the  sorcerer who seized it.
Constantly blazing in front, o Agni, smite him down. Let the mottled  vultures that eat raw meat eat him.
## 8
Proclaim here, o Agni, whichever is the one who is the sorcerer who  does this.
Seize him with your firebrand, o youngest one. Make him subject to the  eye of the one with his eye on men.
## 9
With your sharp eye, Agni, guard the sacrifice. Lead it forth to the east  for the good (gods), o forethoughtful one.
Let the sorcerers not deceive you, ever blazing against the demonic  powers with your murderous intent, o you with your eye on men. 10. With your eye on men, look all over for the demonic among the clans.  Shatter his three points.
Agni, with your blaze cleave his ribs, and hew the root of the sorcerer  into three parts.
## 11
Three times let the sorcerer who smites truth with untruth meet your  onslaught, o Agni.
Sizzling him with your flame, o Jātavedas, wrench him down for the  singer before his very eyes.
## 12
O Agni, in the hoarse-voiced (singer) fix that eye with which you see the  hoof-breaking sorcerer.
Like an Atharvan fire-priest, with your divine light burn down the  unobservant (sorcerer) who injures the true. 13. What today two opponents will utter as curses (at each another), o Agni,  what harshness of speech those with hoarse voices will give birth to,
what missile is born from the mind’s fury, with that pierce the sorcerers  in the heart.
## 14
Pound away the sorcerers with your heat; pound away the demonic with  your blaze, o Agni.
Pound away those who have fools for gods with your flame and away  those who steal life, ever blazing against them.
## 15
Let the gods pound away the crooked man today, and let his harsh  curses come back on him.
Let their missiles reach the man thieving with speech at his vulnerable  spot. Let the sorcerer meet the onslaught of every (god).
## 16
The sorcerer who anoints himself with the bloody flesh of men, who  (does so) with horseflesh,
who carries off the milk of the fertile cow—chop off their heads with  your blaze, o Agni.
## 17
A year’s worth of the milk of the ruddy cow: let the sorcerer not eat of  that, o you with your eye on men.
Whoever seeks to gorge himself on [/steal] the beestings, with your
flame pierce him face-to-face in his vulnerable spot, o Agni.
## 18
Let the sorcerers drink cows’ poison. Let those of evil ways be cut down  before Aditi [/Innocence].
Let the god Savitar hand them over. Let them be despoiled of their
portion of plants.
## 19
From of old, Agni, you crush the sorcerers; demonic powers have never  conquered you in battles.
Burn up the flesh-eaters together with their roots [/with their fools (for  gods)]. Let them not escape your divine lance.
## 20
Guard us from below and from above, Agni, from behind and from in front. Let these unaging, hottest (flames) of yours, ever blazing, burn against  the man who speaks evil.
## 21
From behind, from in front, from below, and from above—as a poet  with your poetic skill protect us all around, o king.
O comrade, (protect) your comrade, as an unaging one (protect him to  attain) old age. O Agni, as an immortal (protect) us who are mortal.
## 22
We would set you, the inspired poet, all around (us) as our fortress, o  mighty Agni,
displaying bold color every day, smiter of (the demonic powers) along  with their wreckage—
## 23
With poison (smite) them along with their wreckage. Burn against  the demons
with your sharp flame, Agni, and with your spears with their
scorching tips.

## 24
Burn against the pair of sorcerers, the two worm-eaters.
I sharpen you, the undeceivable—awaken!—with my thoughts, o
inspired poet.
## 25
Shatter his blaze with your blaze in all directions, o Agni.
Break apart the strength of the demon sorcerer and his manliness.