+++
title = "088"

+++
88 (914)
Sūrya and Vaiśvānara
Mūrdhanvant Āṅgirasa or Vāmadevya
19 verses: triṣṭubh
Two simultaneous superimpositions structure this hymn. On the one hand, the  present-day sacrifice involving the establishment of the ritual fire and the pouring  of oblations into it is contrasted with the primal production of the sacrificial fire  by the gods. The present-day sacrifice begins (vs. 1ab) and ends (vs. 19) the hymn,  and periodically surfaces throughout (vss. 3, 5, 14). However, the dominant strain  is the primordial one, which begins in the second half of verse 1; the role of the  gods in creating the original sacrifice and “begetting” the sacrificial fire is especially  emphasized in verses 4 and the long sequence of 7–13, where the phrase “the gods  begot” appears four times (vss. 8–10, 13), alongside similar expressions. This the matic strain is especially striking because the gods are also regularly identified as  “worthy of the sacrifice” (vss. 3, 6, 11, 13; see also 5, where Agni is so called), that  is, worthy of receiving the sacrifice, while they are in fact performing the sacrifice.
The other theme of superimposition is the identification of Agni, especially  under the epithet Vaiśvānara “belonging to all men,” with the sun. At first the sun’s  dependence on and complementarity with Agni is mentioned (vss. 1b, 2, 6):  the  sun only becomes visible and begins to shine when Agni is also visible. But the  cosmos-filling radiance and heat of Agni (see vss. 3, 5, 7, 9) leads gradually to the  premise that the gods created Agni as the sun, expressed clearly in verses 10–13.  The poet then acknowledges Agni as the sun (vs. 14) and in enigmatic language  describes the two paths between heaven and earth along which the sun / cosmic fire  moves (vss. 15–16).
The last three verses (17–19) seem to provide a simultaneous transition  from the cosmic and primordial elements in the superimposed structures to the  present-day everyday—by way of a dialogue between two unnamed participants.  Most interpreters (e.g., Geldner and Renou) identify the speakers as two priests,  probably the Brahman and Hotar who are explicitly mentioned in the last pāda of  the last verse (19d). But the words that introduce the speakers in verse 17, ávara and pára, are ambiguous. They can mean “nearer” and “farther” (referring to the  positions of the priests on the sacrificial ground), but they can also mean “lower”  and “upper” / “below” and “above,” as derivatives of these words do in verse 14.  In verse 17 they can therefore refer to cosmic elements. It is our view that in verse 17 the dialogue is first presented as a debate between Earth and Heaven (which  appear at the end of vs. 15 as the defining poles of the cosmos) about their roles  in sacrifice, but the dialogue participants unobtrusively become transformed into  present-day priests.
The final verse anchors us firmly in the here-and-now of the sacrifice, but also  asserts that as long as the morning fire will be kindled and the dawns will dawn, the  sacrifice as we know it will be performed. This assertion may involve a bit of propa ganda. The term brāhmaṇá as the technical designation of a priest appears in this  verse; this term was only introduced in the late R̥gveda (as opposed to the earlier  brahmán “formulator”), presumably as part of a codification and partial reorgani zation of the sacrificial system. The poet may then be claiming a long future for the  new system, and implicitly suggesting its long history, stretching back to the origins  of the world—cloaking a religious innovation in a garment of imagined tradition,  as so often.
## 1
The oblation, the drink, unaging and delightful, has been poured into  Agni, the one who finds the sun and touches heaven.
For him to bear and support the world, the gods spread out (the world)  by their autonomous power.
## 2
The world was swallowed and hidden away by darkness; (then) the sun  became manifest when Agni was born.
The gods, Earth and Heaven, and the waters and plants took pleasure in  the fellowship of this one, of him.
## 3
Now urged on by the gods worthy of the sacrifice, I shall praise Agni,  unaging and lofty,
who with his radiance stretches through earth and this heaven, through  the two world-halves and the midspace.
## 4
He who was the first Hotar, delightful to the gods, whom they anointed  with melted butter upon choosing him (as priest),
he made what flies and what goes (on foot), the still and the moving, to  wax strong—Agni Jātavedas.
## 5
When, o Agni Jātavedas, you stood at the head of the world together  with your light,
we spurred you on with thoughts, songs, and recitations. You became  worthy of the sacrifice as the one filling the two world-halves.
## 6
Agni becomes the head of the world by night; thence is the sun born,  rising early in the morning.
(Behold) this artful contrivance of those worthy of the sacrifice, that the  swift one pursues his work, knowing the way.
## 7
He who shone brightly, beautiful to see in his greatness when fully  kindled, the radiant one whose womb is in heaven—
in him, in Agni did all the gods, the protectors of bodies, pour the
oblation with well-spoken speech.1534 X.88
## 8
The gods first begot well-spoken speech, after that the fire [/Agni], after  that the oblation.
This became their sacrifice, the protector of bodies. That does Heaven  know, that does Earth, that the waters.
## 9
The fire [/Agni] whom the gods begot, in whom all beings poured  oblations,
aiming straight, he heated earth and this heaven with his flame in his  greatness.
## 10
For with a praise song, with their powers the gods begot in heaven the  fire [/Agni] that fills the world-halves.
And, for the sake of the world, they made him threefold. He ripens the  plants of all forms.
## 11
When the gods worthy of the sacrifice set him in heaven as the Sun, the  son of Aditi,
when the wandering pair [=Sun and Moon?] came into existence, only  after that did all living beings see in front of (them).
## 12
For the sake of the whole world the gods made Agni Vaiśvānara the  beacon of the days.
He who extends through the radiant dawns uncovers the darkness as he  goes with his flame.
## 13
The gods, poets worthy of the sacrifice, begot unaging Agni Vaiśvānara, the primordial star, wandering but not confounding (the divine
commandments), the mighty and lofty overseer of the wondrous  apparition.
## 14
With mantras we address the poet Agni Vaiśvānara shining everywhere, the god who by his greatness encompasses the two wide (worlds) from  below and from above.
## 15
I have heard from the forefathers that there are two routes, (that of) the  gods and (that of) mortals.
Along those two everything that moves goes together, whatever is  between the father [=Heaven] and the mother [=Earth].
## 16
Conjoined, the two carry the one that wanders, born from the head,  stroked by mind.
He stands facing all beings: not keeping his distance, as, gleaming, he  makes his transit.
## 17
When the lower [/nearer] one and the higher [/farther] one debate with  each other, (they ask) “Of the two leaders of the sacrifice, which of  us two knows it through and through?”
Have our comrades been able to achieve joint revelry? Have they  realized the sacrifice? Who can proclaim this here?
## 18
“How many fires are there and how many suns? How many dawns, and  how many waters?
O forefathers, I am not saying something two-faced to you: o poets,  I am asking you in order to know.” 19. For as long as the fine-feathered (mares [=flames?]) clothe themselves as  if in the face of Dawn, o Mātariśvan,
for that long the Brahmin establishes (the fire), approaching the
sacrifice and taking his seat near to the Hotar.