+++
title = "089"

+++
89 (915)
Indra
Reṇu Vaiśvāmitra
18 verses: triṣṭubh
The poet’s patronymic links him to the Viśvāmitra clan of the IIIrd Maṇḍala, and  indeed the final verse (18) is the Viśvāmitra refrain, found in many of the Indra  hymns of III (III.30.22, etc.). The penultimate verse (17d) mentions the Viśvāmitras,  though that half-verse seems to have been borrowed from the Bharadvājas (VI.25.9).  The poet appears to take his legacy quite seriously, for the hymn strikes one as  self-consciously old-fashioned, a well-crafted Indo-Iranian praise poem, celebrat
ing Indra’s high cosmogonic deeds in carefully balanced rhetoric and beginning  classically with the 1st-person subjunctive announcement “I shall praise Indra”  (índraṃ stavā). The poet has also inherited the verbal cleverness appropriate to a  proper r̥ṣi: his similes and figures of speech are aptly deployed, and he knows how  to mislead his audience and withhold information for surprise effect. This particu
lar skill is clearest in verse 5, which appears to continue the praise of Indra, until  we encounter as the first word of the second hemistich sómaḥ, the real subject of  the verse.
In the second part of the hymn, beginning in verse 8, we encounter another  theme dear to the Indo-Iranians: the punishment to be meted out to those who  break or play false to their alliances or have no alliances at all. The word mitrá “alli ance, ally, deified Alliance,” alone or in compounds, appears seven times in verses  8–15, and is, of course, an element of the poet’s ancestral name. Indra is repeatedly  urged to punish the transgressors on behalf of the gods whose task is to maintain  the proper relationships among men, namely Mitra, Varuṇa, and Aryaman (see  vss. 8–9). It is striking that, unlike in many Indra hymns, we don’t simply call for  Indra’s aid in battle against whatever enemies oppose us; in this hymn our enemies  are characterized as moral failures.
There is another way in which the poet appears to show his consciousness of  his tradition—one that we might hesitantly call “intertextuality.” In verse 14 the  poet seems to be consciously citing, with some variation, the famous Indra-Vr̥tra  hymn I.32. He asks that after Indra’s exercise of vengeance the enemies “will lie”  in a certain way: pr̥thivyā́ āpŕ̥g amuyā́ śáyante “will lie there . . . in the (same) way  (as) the embracer of the earth.” It is difficult not to see this as a deliberate con
flation of two famous phrases describing Vr̥tra from I.32: 5d . . .śayata upapŕ̥k  pr̥thivyā́ḥ “will lie as the embracer of the earth” and 8a . . . amuyā́ śáyānam “lying  in that way.” This quotation and conflation of phrases from a particular, and no

doubt well-known, poem seem quite different from the standard formulaic varia tion of our traditional poets, and it is perhaps not surprising to encounter it in  the Xth Maṇḍala, as the practice of traditional poetic composition was drawing  to a close.
## 01
I shall praise Indra, the most manly, who by his greatness forced apart  the realms of light, apart the ends of the earth,
who, maintaining their boundaries, filled (them) in their expanses,
projecting beyond the rivers in his greatness.
## 02
(As) the sun (turns) around the wide expanses, Indra should cause to  turn here, like chariot wheels,
the one [=the sun?] that like a busy surge never stands still. He has
smashed the black shades of darkness with his flaring.
## 03
Chant to him in the same old way a new sacred formulation that never  turns away, without equal on earth and in heaven—
to Indra, who has distinguished the races of the stranger, like the
(straight and crooked) backs (of horses), and need not seek (further
for) a comrade.
## 04
For Indra I have raised my songs, (like) waters in restless surges from the  depths of the sea,
for him who propped asunder earth and heaven with his powers, like  wheels with an axle.
## 05
He who provides battle fury in his drink, whose first impression is sharp,  the boisterous, vehement one with his arrows, who possesses the
silvery drink—
Soma! All the bushes and trees have not deceived Indra as
near-equivalents (of soma).
## 06
(To him [=Indra]), of whom neither heaven and earth, nor the dry land,  nor the midspace, nor the mountains (are the equal), soma has flowed. When his battle fury is being drawn forth, he cleaves the hard and
shatters the firm.
## 07
He smote Vr̥tra, like an axe the trees. He shattered the fortresses. He dug  channels as if for rivers.
He split the mountain, just like a new pot. Together with his own
yokemates, Indra made the cows his own.
## 08
It’s just you, Indra, who are the insightful requiter of debts. As a knife  does joints, you cleave the crooked (ways of those)
who violate the ordinances of Mitra and Varuṇa, as people violate a  bound alliance.
## 09
Those of evil ways who transgress against Mitra [/an alliance] and  against Aryaman, against agreements and against Varuṇa—
grind your bulging bullish ruddy weapon of death down on those
without alliance (to us), o bullish Indra. 10. Indra is master of heaven and Indra of earth, Indra of the waters and  Indra of the mountains,
Indra of the strong and Indra of the wise; Indra is to be called upon in  peace and Indra in war.
## 11
Indra, the strong, projects beyond the nights and beyond the days,  beyond the midspace and beyond the wellspring of the sea,
beyond the spreading of the wind and beyond the end of the earth,
beyond the rivers and beyond the settlements.
## 12
Like the beacon of the ever-blazing dawn, let your insatiable missile go  rolling forth, Indra.
Like a stone being launched from heaven, pierce with your hottest
weapon those whose alliances are deceitful.
## 13
The months gave way to (him), the trees gave way, the plants gave way,  the mountains gave way;
the two world-halves eagerly gave way to Indra; the waters gave way to  him as he was being born.
## 14
When will vengeance be yours, Indra, such that you will rend the  demonic power of the evil one, which besets (us),
and that those who bloody their allies will lie there like cows at
slaughter, in the same way as (Vr̥tra), embracer of the earth?
## 15
Those who, seeking to rival us, have battered at us, being greatly  arrogant and powerful, o Indra—
let those without alliance (to us) keep company with blind darkness.  The nights with their good lights should prevail over them.
## 16
Because the many soma-pressings of the peoples and the sacred  formulations of the singing seers exhilarate you,
heeding this common call, with your help drive nearby, across all
(others) as they chant.
## 17
In just this way, Indra, might we know your new favors that bring benefits. And with your help, Indra, might we Viśvāmitras know this, as we sing  just now at dawn.
## 18
– For blessing we would invoke bounteous Indra, most manly, at this  raid, at the winning of the prize of victory,
the strong one who listens, (we would invoke) for help in battles, him  who smashes obstacles, the winner of prizes.