+++
title = "090"

+++
90 (916)
Purusạ
Nārāyaṇa
16 verses: anuṣṭubh, except triṣṭubh 16
This is one of the best-known and most influential hymns of the R̥gveda. Its central  symbol is the púruṣa, the “man,” “person,” or “human being.” On the surface, this

hymn tells of the sacrifice of a giant man, from whose parts the world was created.  The theme of creation through a cosmic sacrifice is widespread, but this hymn is  not simply the retelling of an ancient tradition. The púruṣa here serves as a symbol  of the sacrifice itself, which especially in the middle Vedic tradition is a locus of cre
ative power. The púruṣa is thus similar to the later divine figure Prajāpati, who in the  Brāhmaṇas personifies the sacrifice. Indeed this late hymn represents a verse com mentary on the sacrifice that prefigures the prose commentaries of the Brāhmaṇas.  This hymn is also notable because it is the only R̥gvedic mention of the four varṇas,  the hierarchical division of the social order that forms the theoretical basis for the  caste system. One reason that the hymn may have been included in the R̥gveda to  provide a R̥gvedic charter for such a division of society.
The identity of the Man and the sacrifice is established in the opening verse, for  his thousand heads, eyes, and feet recall Agni, the sacrificial fire, and his macro cosmic equivalent, the Sun (cf. Brown 1931: 109–10). The Man comprehends the  earth and extends beyond it. As Mus (1968: 549) has pointed out, the “ten-fingers’  breadth” by which he exceeds the world measures from the Man’s hairline to his  mouth. The Man’s mouth represents speech, which marks the boundary between  the imperceptible world of thought and the perceptible world created by speech. His  mouth is also associated with eating, and in verse 2 the Man rises beyond the world  “through food,” that is, by making the world his food. In later texts the “eater” is the  master and the “eaten” is one who benefits the master (cf. Rau 1957: 34–35). The  image may therefore reflect the Man’s dominance over the world. See also X.125,  in which the mouth is similarly both the locus of speech and the locus of eating.
This theme of dominance or rule continues also in verse 5 in the mutual genera tion of the Man and the Virāj. The word virā́j can mean either “brilliant” or “ruling,  rule.” The latter is the more likely sense here, and therefore this word connects the  hymn to Vedic ideals of the king, who in his consecration encompasses the world in  a similar way that the Man does here (Proferes 2007: esp. ch. 3). Since the term virā́j is grammatically feminine, it complements púruṣa, which is masculine in grammar  and connotation.
The Man is the “offering” (vs. 6), the sacrificial victim (vs. 15), but more espe cially he is the sacrifice itself that the gods, the Sādhyas, and seers performed  (vs. 7). Through this sacrifice the elements of subsequent sacrifices emerged: the  “clotted-mixture” (vs. 8), the verses, chants, meters, and sacrificial formulae (vs.  9), and the sacrificial animals (vs. 10). The parts of the sacrifice also became the  three upper varṇas (vss. 11–12): his mouth the brahmins, masters of knowledge and  speech; his arms the rulers, the possessors of power; and his thighs the freemen or  clansmen, who are the productive support of society. These three classes form parts  of the sacrifice because they can participate in the sacrifice. The śūdras or “servants”  are not part of the sacrifice but rather emerge from the feet of the Man, a symbol  of their low social status and their exclusion from the sacrifice. Finally, the elements  of the cosmos and gods themselves come forth from the sacrifice (vss. 13–14). This  primeval sacrifice thus establishes the “first foundations” for the performance of the sacrifice or even for the ritual, social, divine, and visible worlds more generally (vs.  16ab), and it creates access to heaven (16cd).
The identity of the Sādhyas (in vss. 7 and 16) is not clear. Their name means  “those to be brought to success,” and they appear to be ancient sacrificers whose  proper ritual performance has “perfected” them and who have attained god-like  status or the status of gods.
## 1
The Man has a thousand heads, a thousand eyes, and a thousand feet. Having covered the earth on all sides, he extended ten fingers’ breadth  beyond.
## 2
The Man alone is this whole (world): what has come into being and  what is to be.
Moreover, he is master of immortality when he climbs beyond (this
world) through food.
## 3
So much is his greatness, but the Man is more than this:
a quarter of him is all living beings; three quarters are the immortal in  heaven.
## 4
With his three quarters the Man went upward, but a quarter of him  came to be here again.
From there he strode out in different directions toward what eats and  what does not eat.
## 5
From him the Virāj was born; from the Virāj the Man.
Upon his birth, he reached beyond the earth from behind and also from  in front.
## 6
When, with the Man as the offering, the gods extended the sacrifice, spring was its melted butter, summer its firewood, autumn its offering. 7. On the ritual grass they consecrated that sacrifice, the Man, born at the  beginning.
With him the gods sacrificed, (also) the Sādhyas and those who
were seers.
## 8
From that sacrifice, when it was offered in full, the clotted-butter  mixture was collected.
It [=the sacrifice] was made into the animals: those of the air (and
both) those that belong to the wilderness and those that belong to
the village.
## 9
From this sacrifice, when it was offered in full, the verses and chants  were born.
Meters were born from it. The sacrificial formula—from it that was born. 10. From it horses were born and whatever animals have teeth in both jaws. Cows were born from it. From it were born goats and sheep.
## 11
When they apportioned the Man, into how many parts did they  arrange him?
What was his mouth? What his two arms? What are said to be his two  thighs, his two feet?

## 12
The brahmin was his mouth. The ruler was made his two arms.
As to his thighs—that is what the freeman was. From his two feet the  servant was born.
## 13
The moon was born from his mind. From his eye the sun was born. From his mouth Indra and Agni, from his breath Vāyu was born.
## 14
From his navel was the midspace. From his head the heaven developed. From his two feet the earth, and the directions from his ear. Thus they  arranged the worlds.
## 15
Its enclosing sticks were seven; the kindling sticks were made three  times seven,
when the gods, extending the sacrifice, bound the Man as the
(sacrificial) animal.
## 16
With the sacrifice the gods performed the sacrifice for themselves: these  were the first foundations.
These, its greatness, accompanied (it) to heaven’s vault, where the
ancient Sādhyas and the gods are.