+++
title = "091"

+++
91 (917)
Agni
Aruṇa Vaitahavya
15 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 15
This hymn is reminiscent of X.89 in style: a well-crafted, self-consciously rhetorical  praise of the god utilizing standard tropes and traditional images. The poet of this  hymn is especially fond of etymological figures (especially in the first few verses)  and chaining between verses (note, e.g., vss. 8d/9a, 10/11).
The hymn covers many familiar themes, contrasting the physical fire (e.g., vss.  5–7) with the deified fire and his ritual roles, but it is the latter aspect of Agni that  is dominant.
## 01
Awakening, he is kindled by the wakeful ones, the household master in  the house, becoming refreshed in the footprint of refreshment,
the Hotar of every oblation, worthy to be chosen, far-ranging,
far-radiant, a good comrade to one who acts as comrade.
## 02
He, with beauty lovely to see, a guest in every house—in every (piece of)  wood he is set like (a bird) of swooping pursuit in the woods.
Belonging to the people, he does not overlook any people. Belonging to  the clan, he dwells among the clans—each and every clan.
## 03
Very skillful through your skills, through your will you are strong-willed.  O Agni, you are the all-knowing poet through your poetic craft.
As good one, you alone hold sway over goods, which both Heaven and  Earth foster. 4. Foresightful, o Agni, you have settled down seasonably to your
ghee-rich womb, in the footprint of refreshment.
Your arrivals show brightly like those of the dawns, your reins spotless  like the rays of the sun.
## 05
Your beauties, brilliant like the lightning flashes of a rain-bearing  (cloud), show brightly like the beacons of the dawns,
when, set loose toward the plants and woods, you encompass them
yourself as food in your mouth.
## 06
The plants conceived him as their embryo at the proper season; the  waters as his mothers begot this Agni.
Both the woody (plants) and the sprouts (become) pregnant and give  birth to him who is just the same everywhere.
## 07
When whipped up by the wind, aroused, you spread yourself out,  constantly worrying the dry food at will,
your unaging troops [=flames] take up their places separately like
charioteers, as you go burning, Agni.
## 08
Creator of wisdom, furtherer of the rite, Agni, the Hotar, best
encompassing thought,
just him at the small oblation, just the same for the great one—just him  they choose—no other than you.
## 09
Just you do they choose here—the ritual adepts devoted to you—as  Hotar at the rites, o Agni,
when seeking the gods they provide pleasurable offerings for you—the  men with their oblations, with their twisted ritual grass.
## 10
Yours, Agni, is the office of Hotar; yours that of Potar in its turn; yours  that of Neṣṭar; you are the Agnidh [=fire-kindler] of the one who
follows truth.
Yours is the office of Praśāstar; you act as Adhvaryu; you are both the  Brahman-priest and the Houselord in our home.
## 11
The mortal who for you, the immortal, o Agni, will perform pious work  with the kindling stick or by the preparation of the oblation,
for him you become the Hotar; his mission do you undertake. You
speak on his behalf; you perform sacrifice, you act as Adhvaryu
for him.
## 12
These here—the thoughts, speeches, verses, songs, and good praises  from us—have come together for him,
for Jātavedas the good one—goods-seeking (praises) in which he will  take pleasure as their strengthener, though they are (already) strong.
## 13
I would proclaim this good praise here, a newer one, to him, the  age-old, who is eager for it: let him hear us.
May it come very close, to touch his heart, like an eager wife, richly
dressed, to her husband.

## 14
(For him) into whom horses, bulls, oxen, mated cows, rams, once  released, are poured out [=offered],
for the kīlāla-drinker who has soma on his back, for the ritual adept
I generate with my heart a pleasing thought—for Agni.
## 15
An oblation has been poured into your mouth, Agni, like ghee into a  ladle, like soma into a cup.
Place in us prize-gaining wealth, rich in heroes, celebrated,
glorious, lofty.