+++
title = "092"

+++
92 (918)
All Gods
Śāryāta Mānava
15 verses: jagatī
A generally disorganized and often puzzling hymn, it nonetheless begins with three  well-turned verses to Agni, using some of the same lexicon and imagery as the pre ceding Agni hymn. This initial similarity may account for the placement of the hymn
in the maṇḍala. Two Agni verses also close the hymn (14–15) in a ritual context. What lies between seems to lack structure and logical progression. Some verses  contain an odd assortment of divinities and semi-divinities (e.g., vss. 4–5, 11–13);  Rudra and/or the Maruts recur in several verses (5–6, 9). Fragments of familiar  myths appear without further development—for example, Indra’s interference with  the horses of the Sun in verse 8—and other verses contain apparent references to  other stories of which we know nothing (e.g., vs. 10). In short, despite some pleas ing passages, the hymn mostly yields frustration.
## 01
(I invoke) for you the charioteer of the sacrifice, the clanlord of clans, the  Hotar, the guest by night, rich in radiance.
Blazing in the dry (sticks), flickering in the golden (plants), the bullish  beacon, worthy of the sacrifice, has reached heaven.
## 02
This one here, who drinks directly, have both (sides [=gods and men])  made their own: Agni the supporter, the furtherer of the rite.
The dawns kiss the youthfully exuberant one like the night, the one set in  front, the descendant of himself, of ruddy (fire).
## 03
Yes indeed! we discriminate between his counsels and those of a niggard.  Twigs have been bepoured for his eating.
When the fearsome ones [=Aṅgirases] reached immortality, just after  that did they pay tribute to the divine race.
## 04
For heaven, the broad expanse, is the trajectory of truth. (There there is)  Reverence and great Devotion, the very admirable.
(There) Indra, Mitra, Varuṇa perceive with like mind, and Bhaga and  Savitar—(all) possessing refined skill. 5. The rivers go forth with the journeying Rudra; across great Devotion  they have run—
those with which the earth-circling one [=Parjanya?], going around
the broad expanse, constantly rumbling in his belly, besprinkles
everything.
## 06
Busy are the Rudras, the Maruts belonging to all communities, the  falcons of heaven, nestlings of the lord.
Through them Varuṇa, Mitra, Aryaman make their observations, and  Indra hastening with the hastening gods.
## 07
Having labored to exhaustion, they have obtained their benefit in Indra,  in the sight of the sun, and in the masculine nature of the bull—
the bards [=Aṅgirases?] who fashioned as his due the mace, his
yokemate, at the sessions [=sacrifices] of men.
## 08
He [=Indra] brought to a halt even the golden (horses) of the Sun, his  very own. Anyone feels fear before Indra the stronger,
before the snorting from the belly of the fearsome bull. Day after day  the victorious one thunders, unrepellable.
## 09
With reverence show forth your praise today to Rudra the skillful, who  rules over heroes,
(and to those [=Maruts]) with whom he, the well-disposed, very helpful,  self-glorious one, keeps company—with those of heaven who travel
their ways, the avid ones.
## 10
Because they disseminated their fame to their progeny—Br̥haspati, the  bull, and those akin to Soma—
the first Atharvan (priest) distributed it through sacrifices. The gods  and the Bhr̥gus perceive with like mind through their skills.
## 11
For Heaven and Earth of abundant seed, Narāśaṃsa, the four-square,  Yama, Aditi,
god Tvaṣṭar, treasure-giver, the masters of the R̥bhus, Rodasī [/the two  World-Halves], the Maruts, Viṣṇu are deserving.
## 12
And of us, the fire-priests, our sage poet [=Agni?] (is) widely
(perceptible). Let Ahi Budhnya listen to his call;
let Sun and Moon, the heaven dwellers wandering separately. O you two  Nahuṣī [=Manu and Nahus?], through visionary thought and ritual  labor take cognizance of this one.
## 13
Let Pūṣan, belonging to the All Gods, let the Child of the Waters, let  Vāyu help us forward to seek our movable (goods=livestock).
Chant to Vāta, the lifebreath, all the more. O Aśvins, easy to invoke,  hear this on your journey.
## 14
Him who presides over these fearless clans, the self-glorious one, we  hymn with hymns;
Aditi without assault, along with all the Wives (of the Gods), and the  youthful lord of the night (do I?), the manly minded, (hymn).1544 X.93
## 15
Here crackles the foremost Aṅgiras [=Agni] from birth. The pressing  stones, aloft, look upon the ceremony,
(those stones) by which the wide-gazing (soma) became widely
extended. The (livestock) pen is well-grounded, the axe in the
wooden (tree).