+++
title = "093"

+++
93 (919)
All Gods
Tānva Pārtha
15 verses:  prastārapaṅkti, except anuṣṭubh 2–3, 13, paṅkti? 9, nyaṅkusāriṇī 11,  purastādbr̥hatī 15 [per Anukramaṇī]
Even more so than the previous hymn, X.92, this hymn to the All Gods poses more  challenges to the interpreter than it yields rewards. This opinion seems to be almost  universally shared (see, e.g., Geldner, Renou, Gonda [1975: 212]), and it is generally  agreed that some of the problems may be due to faulty transmission.
The poem is composed in a variety of meters, with verses of mixed twelve/ eleven- and eight-syllable pādas, at least in principle—though often these pādas  do not conform, by syllable count, caesura, or cadence quantities, to their models.  (On the meter see Oldenberg 1888: 101, 117.) The syntax of the hymn is also quite  sketchy, with many verbs missing and with nominal forms often apparently merely  juxtaposed rather than being linked by normal case relations, and the identity of  the referents in many verses is obscure.
The reasons for the choice of the gods honored and their sequence are also not  clear. The hymn begins with a verse to Heaven and Earth, who recur in verse 10.  Verses 2–3 treat the gods in general, while verse 4 begins to name names, starting  with the Ādityas. The next three verses (5–7) form a relatively well-organized unit,  with a focus on the Aśvins and a shared opening (utá naḥ “and us”). The end of  verse 7 provides a transition to verse 8, with the R̥bhus and their master, Indra, who  also appears in verses 9 and 11. The poet summarizes his poem in verse 12 (with  more pride than we would perhaps allow him). Verses 13–15 constitute a dānastuti,  mentioning a number of patrons. Note that the name that the Anukramaṇī supplies  for the poet has simply been extracted from the name(s) of one or more patrons in  verse 15.
## 01
Become greatly wide, o Heaven and Earth; the two world-halves are  always like exuberant young women for us.
With these (gods?) protect us from one more powerful; with them protect  us when (he is) swollen with strength.
## 02
At every sacrifice that mortal honors the gods
who, of longest fame, seeks to entice them here with benevolent
thoughts. 3. O you who have control over them all, the shield of the gods is mighty, for they all possess all might; all are worthy of the sacrifice at the
sacrifices.
## 04
The kings of immortality are gladdening: Aryaman, Mitra, Varuṇa,  and the Earth-Encircler [=Wind?]—
and what about Rudra praised of men?—the Maruts, Pūṣan, Bhaga.
## 05
And for us by night (and by day), o you two of bullish goods [=Aśvins],  the Sun and Moon are our joint guides toward the seat of the waters, when in company with them Ahi Budhnya [/the Serpent of the Deep]  has been set in the depths.
## 06
And for us let the two gods, the Aśvins, lords of beauty, let Mitra and  Varuṇa make broad space through their domains.
He hastens toward great riches, across difficulties as if across wastelands. 7. And to us let the Aśvins, though Rudras, be merciful—and all the gods,  the Lord of the Chariot, Bhaga,
R̥bhu, Vāja, o Masters of the R̥bhus, the Earth-Encircler, o you who  afford all possessions.
## 08
Craftsmanly is the Master of the R̥bhus [=Indra]; craftsmanly is the  exhilarating drink of the one who does honor—(let) your two
prizewinning fallow bays (come) hither, as you speed—
of the one whose melody is also difficult to surpass, (whose) separate  sacrifice is like (a sacrifice) stemming from Manu.
## 09
Make for us immoderation (of wealth), god Savitar. I will praise (you?)  in company with our patrons.
Along with his draft-horses, Indra keeps hitching up (wealth) for these  (patrons) of ours and keeps hold of “the wheel of the domains” like  a rein.
## 10
On them, o Heaven and Earth, confer great fame reaching to all  domains, and on the heroes among us,
(and confer) strengthening nourishment for the winning of the prize,  strengthening nourishment for victory through wealth.
## 11
O Indra, inclined toward us, (come?) to this laudation, wherever it may  be, for our dominance, mighty one.
Always protect (us) for our dominance. Let our acquisition fatten, o  good one.
## 12
This praise of mine for the superior men, the praise whose course is  dazzling as if by its stretching to the sun, they have strengthened,
as a carpenter strengthens a horse-“conciliator” [=piece of horse tack?],  (so) it cannot be budged.
## 13
They whose (priestly gift) comes rolling, their (priestly gift) is golden,  yoked with wealth—
(it is) like manly forces when facing the other side, like one whose ends  have been accomplished [?] at will.

## 14
I proclaim this in front of Duḥśīma, Pr̥thavāna, Vena, in front of Rāma  the lordly, in front of the patrons
who, having yoked five hundred, (sent) them along the path, destined  for us, (so that) their (priestly gift) has become widely famed.
## 15
In addition here and now seven and seventy
at once did Tānva assign (to us), at once did Pārthya assign, at once did  Māyava assign.