+++
title = "094"

+++
94 (920)
Pressing Stones
The snake Arbuda Kādraveya
14 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 5, 7, 14
This second hymn to the pressing stones (for the relations among the three press ing-stone hymns, see the introduction to X.76) is a playful and imaginative praise  of these implements for extracting the soma juice from the plant. The stones are  animatized throughout—as human workers, as hungry bulls, as birds, as antelopes,  as horses. But there is special emphasis on them as speakers. The first four verses  begin with “speaking” verbs (and often continue with them), with a variant phrase  beginning verse 5, and the last two verses (13–14) echo these verbs. These last two  verses treat the unhitching of the stones, their task completed, and the last pāda of  verse 14 rather poignantly not only releases them but de-animatizes them: they are  now perceived as just stones.
## 1
Let them speak forth; let us speak forth. Speak a speech to the pressing  stones that are speaking,
when, o stones, o mountains, all together you swift ones possessed of  soma bear your signal-call, your cry to Indra.
## 2
They speak as if in hundreds, in thousands. They roar with their golden  mouths.
Having toiled at their good work, the good workers, the stones, have  achieved the eating of the oblation even before the Hotar.
## 3
They speak; in this way they found the honey. They growl over the  cooked flesh.
Gnawing at the branch of the reddish tree, the gluttonous bulls have
bellowed out to it.
## 4
They speak loftily by reason of the delighting delightful (soma).
Shrieking to Indra, in this way they found the honey.
(Fit) to be clasped by the sisters [=fingers], the clever ones have danced,  making the earth heed with their trampling.
## 5
The eagles have raised their speech up to heaven. In their lair the black  antelopes have danced vigorously. Down they go downward to the rendezvous with the lower one. They  have themselves produced much semen from the sun-bright one.
## 6
Like powerful draft(-horses), they have held fast, yoked together, the  bulls bearing the chariot-poles.
When panting and gulping they have bellowed, their snorting sounds  like that of chargers.
## 7
To those who possess ten tracks, ten girthbands, ten yoking cords,  ten yokes,
ten reins—sing to the unaging ones pulling ten chariot-poles, ten yoked  ones [=fingers?].
## 8
These swift stones have ten fastening straps. Their delightful harness  encircles (them).
They have taken as their share the beestings of the pressed somian stalk  of the first plant.
## 9
The soma-eaters kiss the two fallow bays of Indra. Milking the plant,  they sit on the cow(hide).
Having drunk the somian honey milked by them, Indra grows strong,  spreads out, plays the bull.
## 10
Your plant is a bull. You will certainly not suffer harm. You are always  possessed of nourishment, (well-)fed.
You are pleasing to him whose ceremony you have enjoyed because of  your grandeur, as if because of a richly endowed (daughter, given to  him in marriage?), o pressing stones.
## 11
Drilled or undrilled, you stones are unwearying, unslackened,
immortal,
unailing, unaging, unbudgeable, very stout, unthirsty, unthirsting.
## 12
Firmly fixed are your fathers [=mountains] in every age. Desirous of  repose, they do not hitch themselves up from their seat.
Undecaying, companions of the golden (soma), (like) golden trees, they  have made Heaven and Earth listen by their bellowing.
## 13
Just so do the stones speak at their unhitching, *or on their course they  speak with their tramplings—the stones as they drink (the soma)
directly.
Like grain-producers [=farmers/millstones] strewing seed, strewing
their “seed” [=semen] they engorge the soma. They do not diminish
him though they gnaw at him.
## 14
When (the soma) was pressed in the ceremony they raised their voice,  like playful (boys) jostling their mother.
Unhitch (the stones) that have pressed it and release the inspired
thought of the (priest) who has pressed it. Let them roll away, being  (now) perceived as (just) stones [/the stones no longer being held in
harness].
