+++
title = "095"

+++
95 (921)
Purūravas and Urvaśı̄
Dialogue between Purūravas Aiḍa and Urvaśī
18 verses: triṣṭubh
This very famous and much-discussed hymn contains the dialogue between the  Apsaras Urvaśī and her discarded mortal husband Purūravas. He accosts her on her  journey (presumably back to her fellow Apsarases) and demands that they discuss  what went wrong with their marriage (vs. 1). He reminisces about her beauty (vs.  3) and her good wifely ways (vs. 4), while she impatiently dismisses him (vs. 2) and  provides her own view of her service as wife (vs. 5). The next verses (6–11) primarily  concern the crowd of Apsarases who attended Urvaśī when she gave birth to her  and Purūravas’s son Āyu. Purūravas evinces some jealousy about (as well as some  physical attraction to) these females with whom he competed for Urvaśī’s attention  and to whom she is returning, while Urvaśī here implies that Purūravas should have  his mind on more manly matters than love, such as military protection (esp. vss. 7  and 11; see also the ironic vocative “hero” in 5).
Urvaśī attempts to dismiss Purūravas again (vs. 11). He tries another tack to keep  her from leaving: how can she separate him from his loving son (vs. 12)—to which she  briskly replies that she’ll send him the kid, chillingly referred to in the neuter, back to  him (vs. 12). The second half of this verse forms a ring with the second half of verse  2, her first speech: she seems thus to be trying to bring the conversation to a close.  But Purūravas raises the stakes: with masterfully expressed self-pity he then suggests  that he may disappear or die (and won’t she be sorry then...?, vs. 14). Urvaśī wearily  talks him out of it (vss. 15–16). He tries one more time (vs. 17), using a grander and  more solemn linguistic register. The hymn ends with a somewhat enigmatic summary  verse (18) containing the gods’ address to Purūravas at the end of this affair. Because  Purūravas’s connection with the immortal Apsaras (note that Apsarases are called  “immortal” in vs. 9) was severed and his son was returned to him, the mortal, he is  bound to death, and his offspring will relate to the gods as mortals do, by sacrifice.  But he will nonetheless later receive a joyous afterlife in heaven. (It is noteworthy that  this is the only occurrence of the word svargá “heaven” in the R̥gveda.)
One of the many extraordinary features of this brief masterpiece is the way  it replicates the shifting emotional logic, the abrupt changes of tone and subject,  and the twisting of the other’s words characteristic of a genuine marital quarrel of  whatever era and culture, while presenting us with pictures of great beauty, however  difficult the language is to interpret in many places. It is also uncompromising in its  depiction of a resolute and hard-hearted female, unmoved by the abject pleas and  emotional blackmail of her former lover who is still in love with her, anxious to  return to her carefree life with her fellow Apsarases, and happy enough to abandon  her child in order to get free.
There are several well-known later versions of this story. The Śatapatha  Brāhmaṇa XI.5.1 embeds many of the R̥gvedic verses into a prose narrative, which seems to have misunderstood, deliberately or not, several of the crucial verses. And  one of the three surviving plays of the great Classical Sanskrit poet Kālidāsa is a  much expanded treatment of the pair’s love affair. No subsequent version can toler ate the radical portrait of the emotionally detached Urvaśī found in the R̥gveda; in  all cases the separation of the former lovers is not the result of the female’s decision,  but of a curse. In the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, a creative misreading of verse 3—involv ing bleating pet lambs tied to a bedpost, a thunderstorm, and the provision that  Urvaśī never see Purūravas naked—results in Urvaśī’s disappearance. In Kālidāsa’s  play the curse has no connection to anything in the R̥gvedic hymn: a love-besotted  Urvaśī brings it on herself by uttering her beloved Purūravas’s name at the wrong  time. (In both versions the portrayal of Purūravas does retain his own passion for  Urvaśī; in fact in Kālidāsa’s play he goes mad after she disappears and asks birds,  beasts, and trees, in the late Middle Indo-Aryan language variety Apabhraṃśa,  about her whereabouts.) It is an interesting commentary on the changing fortunes  of female figures that the hard edges of the R̥gvedic Urvaśī must be softened to  make her acceptable in later literature.
## 1
[Purūravas:] “Woe, wife! Thoughtfully—stand still, fearsome woman!— let us two now exchange words.
These thoughts, if unuttered, will not bring us joy even on a distant day.” 2. [Urvaśī:] “What shall I do with this speech of yours? I have marched  forth, like the foremost of the dawns.
Purūravas—go off home again. I am as hard to attain as the wind.”
## 3
[Purūravas:] “...as an arrow from the quiver of beauty, a shot winning  cows, as a charge winning hundreds.
Under the will of no man, she will keep flashing forth like (lightning);  like a lamb its bleating, so are her tumultuous (tempests) displayed.” 4. [Purūravas:] “She was (always) imparting energy, a good thing, to her  father-in-law—every dawn, whenever he wants it, from the house
opposite.
She attained a home in which she took pleasure; day and night she was  pierced by my rod.”
## 5
[Urvaśī:] “Three times a day you used to pierced me with your rod, and  you ‘filled it up’ [=had an erection] for me, who did not seek it.
Purūravas, I followed your will. You were then the king of my body, you  ‘hero.’”
## 6
[Purūravas:] “The beautifully glowing rank (of Apsarases), friends in good  favor, interlaced like a pond’s-eye [=lotus], (always) on the move—
these flowed like reddish salves; like milk-cows they bellowed for beauty.” 7. [Urvaśī:] “When this one [=the son of Purūravas and Urvaśī] was being  born, the women were in attendance, and the rivers, gurgling to
themselves, strengthened him,
(just) as for great battle, for the smiting of Dasyus, the gods made you  strong, Purūravas.”

## 8
[Purūravas:] “When I, a human, drew near to those nonhuman women  when they were taking off their robes,
like a shy antelope they shied away from me, like horses that have  brushed against a chariot.”
## 9
[Urvaśī:] “When a mortal, going to caress immortal women, mingles  (with their bodies) amid their cries, as if by his intentions,
like ducks they preen their own bodies, like horses playful and
constantly nipping.”
## 10
[Purūravas:] “She who in her flight kept flashing like lightning, the  watery (maiden) bringing me the delights of love—
(a son) belonging to men, nobly born, was born from the water— Urvaśī extends Āyu his lifetime long.”
## 11
[Urvaśī:] “You were born just so: to afford protection. (But instead) you  have exerted this force on me, Purūravas.
I, knowing, instructed you on that very day. You did not listen to me.  Why will you speak without profit?”
## 12
[Purūravas:] “When will my begotten son seek his father? (When) will he  let a tear roll like a wheel, on recognizing (him [=his father])?
Who keeps apart a married couple joined in mind as long as the fire will  (still) blaze in (the house of) the parents-in-law?”
## 13
[Urvaśī:] “I’ll give him an answer when he lets his tear roll. Like a wheel  he screeches for kindly care.
I will send it [=child] to you, that thing of yours that’s with us. Go away  home. For you will not attain me, you fool.”
## 14
[Purūravas:] “And if the gods’ pet should fly away today, never to  return, to go to the most distant distance ...
Then he might lie in the lap of Dissolution. Then again the ravening  wolves might eat him...”
## 15
[Urvaśī:] “O Purūravas, don’t die. Don’t fly away. Don’t let the unkindly  wolves eat you.
There exist no partnerships with women: they have hyenas’ hearts.” 16. [Urvaśī:] “When in different form I roamed among mortals and spent  the nights (with you?) for four autumns,
once a day I ate a drop of ghee. Just from that I continue to be sated now.” 17. [Purūravas:] “She who fills the midspace, who is the measurer of the  dusky realm, Urvaśī—I, the best (of men?), seek to bring her under  my sway.
Since the granting of a good deed will stand you in good stead, turn  back: my heart is scorched.”
## 18
Thus these gods here say to you, Aiḍa [=Purūravas]: “As it (turned out)  this way, you have a bond to death.
Your progeny will sacrifice to the gods with an oblation, but you will  also rejoice in heaven.”