+++
title = "096"

+++
96 (922) Praise of Indra’s Horses
Baru Āṅgirasa or Sarvahari Aindra
13 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 12–13
Like III.44 the design of this hymn is an extended pun between the words  hári/hárita “gold-colored, tawny” (used regularly for soma and for Indra’s “fallow  bay” horses) and the verb hárya “enjoy” and its derivatives. As in III.44 we have  rendered the former as “golden,” even in reference to the horses, and the latter as  “gladden(ing),” as a close English equivalent of this play on words. A subsidiary  pun is persistent through the hymn, involving the golden mace and the golden soma  (see, e.g., vs. 3); the referent of the adjective is often not expressed, and the audience  is free to fill in either or both. The context often allows either, and since they are  identical in gender, there is no grammatical obstacle. Similar ambiguity is found  between the golden horses and the golden soma (e.g., vs. 10). In other verbal twists  the “wrong” qualifier is used, but the underlying pun evokes the “right” one. Thus  in verse 4 the “gladdening” mace is compared to the sun, which should really be  “golden.”
## 1
I proclaim your two golden (horses) at the great rite of distribution.  I prevail over the gladdening, exhilarating drink for you who are eager  for it,
the drink which, like ghee, drips with golden (drops). Let the songs enter  you, whose form is golden.
## 2
For those who have cried out together toward the golden womb are  the ones spurring on the two golden (horses) toward it as toward a
heavenly seat.
(To him) whom they fill with golden (soma drops) as milk-cows do
with golden (drops of ghee)—to Indra chant a fortifying (hymn),
accompanied by golden (soma).
## 3
This is his gold-colored mace, which is made of metal. The golden (mace/ soma) is eager; the golden one is in his two fists.
Brilliant and fair-lipped is he who has as the missile of his battle fury the  golden (mace/soma). The golden forms are fixed fast in Indra.
## 4
Like the beacon in heaven [=sun], the gladdening (mace) has been set  in place; the (golden) mace will take wide compass like a golden
(racehorse) with its charge.
The golden-lipped (mace), which is made of metal, thrust against the  serpent. The bearer of the golden (mace) became thousand-flamed.
## 5
It was just you who were gladdened when you were praised by the  ancient sacrificers, o golden-haired Indra.
You are glad (now): yours is every bounty, complete and gladdening,  worthy to be hymned, o golden-born one.

## 6
These two gladdening golden (horses) convey in his chariot the
mace-bearing, exhilarating, praiseworthy Indra in his exhilaration.
For him who is glad for the many soma-pressings, for Indra, the golden  soma juices have run.
## 7
Sufficient for his desire, the golden ones have run; the golden ones spur  on the surpassing pair of golden (horses) for the steadfast one.
Who speeds as he pleases with his golden steeds, he has attained his
desire that provides the golden (soma).
## 8
Golden-bearded, golden-haired, made of metal, who, drinking the  golden (soma), has grown strong on the drink of surpassing,
who with his golden steeds, rich in prizewinning mares, will deliver his  two golden (horses) beyond all difficult ways,
## 9
Whose golden lips, which are like two (golden) spoons, have flown  apart, as he sets his two lips to twitching for the prize,
when, after the cup is done, he will groom his two golden (horses),
upon drinking of the exhilarating drink, the gladdening stalk.
## 10
And the seat of the gladdening (soma) is in both dwelling places. The  possessor of golden (horses/soma) has roared toward the prize like a  racehorse.
Because even the great (Earth), the Holy Place, was gladdened by your  might, you took on lofty vigor—yourself also gladdening.
## 11
You, being gladdened, (filled) the two world-halves with your greatness.  You now become glad at every new dear thought.
O lord, reveal forth to the golden sun the gladdening dwelling place of  the cow.
## 12
Let the advance teams of the peoples convey you here in your chariot— you, the golden-lipped, in your gladness, o Indra,
so that you will drink of the honey that is offered, finding gladness in  the ten-armed sacrifice at the joint revelry.
## 13
You have drunk of the earlier soma-pressings, o possessor of the golden  (horses/soma), and this pressing here is yours alone.
Find exhilaration in the honeyed soma, Indra. Rain it utterly into your  belly, o bull.