+++
title = "097"

+++
97 (923)
Plants
Bhiṣaj Ātharvaṇa
23 verses: anuṣṭubh
Atharvan in character, this hymn is addressed to the healing plants, which are  praised for their lineage and their powers and implored to provide remedies for  particular sick men. The 1st-person speaker is presumably not merely the poet but also the healer, and he calls on the plants to lend their power to his verbal healing  spells (see esp. vs. 14).
## 01
The plants that were born earlier, the third generation before the gods— I shall now call to mind the one hundred and seven forms of those
brown (plants).
## 02
One hundred are the forms of you all, o mother, and a thousand are  your shoots.
So then, o you all who possess a hundred strategies, make this (man)  here to be free of disease for me.
## 03
Rejoice, o plants, since you are blooming and fruitful.
Like victorious mares, the sprouts deliver.
## 04
O mothers, called “plants,” o goddesses, I implore you in this way: “Might I gain a horse, a cow, a garment, (in gaining [=curing]) your
very self, o man.”
## 05
Your seat is in the aśvattha-tree; your nest is made in the parṇa-tree: you will surely get a share in the cow when you will gain [=cure]
the man.
## 06
When the plants have come together, like kings at an assembly,
that inspired poet is said to be a healer who smites the demons and
banishes affliction.
## 07
The “horse possessor,” the “soma-possessor,” the “strengthener,” the  “overpowering one”—
all these plants have I acquired for this (man) here not to be harmed. 8. The unbridled forces of the plants rise up like cows from the cowpen as they seek to gain the stake and your very self, o man.
## 09
Your mother is the “Restorer” by name, and you all are “Expellers.” You are streambeds [=stalks] with wings [=leaves]. You expel what
causes affliction.
## 10
They have stepped over the fences like a thief over a barricade.
The plants have driven forth whatever malady of the body there is.
## 11
When I take these plants in my hand, invigorating them,
the very self of the sickness perishes, as if before being captured alive. 12. Him whose every limb, every joint you slither over,
from him thrust aside the sickness, like a mighty (man) lying in the middle. 13. Fly forth, o sickness, together with the cāṣa-bird and the kikidīví-bird. Perish together with the swoop of the wind and together with the
blizzard [?].
## 14
Let one of you help the other. Give help to one another.
All of you, being in agreement—help this speech of mine.
## 15
Those that bear fruit and those without fruit, those without flowers and  those that have flowers—
impelled by Br̥haspati, let them release us from distress.1554 X.98
## 16
Let them release me from (the shackle) of a curse, and also from (the  shackle) of Varuṇa,
and from the shackle of Yama—from every offense against the gods.
## 17
Flying down from heaven, the plants spoke:
“The man whom we will reach (while he is still) alive, that man will not  suffer harm.”
## 18
The many plants, having a hundred appearances, whose king
is Soma—
of those you are the highest—sufficient for our desire, weal for our heart. 19. You plants whose king is Soma, spread wide along the earth—
impelled by Br̥haspati, jointly give heroic power to this one here
[=medicinal plant].
## 20
Let your digger not suffer harm, nor him for whom I dig you.
Let our two-footed and four-footed all be free of affliction.
## 21
Both those who hear this nearby and those who have gone far into the  distance —
all of you, having coming together, o sprouts—jointly give heroic power  to this one here [=medicinal plant].
## 22
The plants come to an agreement with King Soma:
“For whom the brahmin acts, him, o king, will we deliver.”
## 23
You are the highest, o plant. The trees are your subordinates.
Let him be subordinate to us, whoever assails us.