+++
title = "098"

+++
98 (924) Devāpi’s Plea for Rain
Devāpi Ārṣṭiṣeṇa
12 verses: triṣṭubh
This hymn contains a prayer for rain, set in the context of a similar (successful)  prayer in legendary time. The protagonists of this legend are Devāpi, a priest and  poet, in fact the Hotar and Purohita (at this late stage in the R̥gveda this latter  priestly role seems to have become established) for Śaṃtanu, presumably a king,  and the god Br̥haspati. The first four verses consist of a dialogue between Devāpi  (vss. 1, 3), Br̥haspati (vs. 2), and, in our view, Śaṃtanu (vs. 4, though some schol
ars consider this verse the speech of Br̥haspati). Devāpi requests Br̥haspati to act  as intermediary for him, asking the appropriate god to send rain. Devāpi must  have made this request standing by the ritual fire, for in verse 2 Br̥haspati identifies  Agni as their go-between and then provides Devāpi with a speech, presumably a  charm that can provoke rain. Devāpi acknowledges this gift in verse 3, and in verse  4 Śaṃtanu asks Devāpi to perform sacrifice.
The next three verses (5–7) summarize the successful outcome of this story. With  verse 8 the hymn turns to present time and to the god Agni, who carried the original plea from Devāpi to Br̥haspati. The present poet again asks Agni to send rain (vss.  8, 10, 12), while mentioning somewhat wistfully the many sacrificial gifts we might  receive (vs. 9)—gifts that he then offers to Agni (vs. 10) to present in turn to Indra  (vs. 11).
## 1
[Devāpi:] “Br̥haspati, confront (the appropriate) divinity for me,  (saying): ‘whether you are Mitra or Varuṇa, or Pūṣan,
or whether you are the companion of the Maruts [=Indra], or are with  the Ādityas or the Vasus, make Parjanya rain for Śaṃtanu.’”
## 2
[Br̥haspati:] “The quick messenger god [=Agni], taking cognizance,  went from you, Devāpi, to me.
Turn here, face to face in front of me: I place heaven-bright speech in  your mouth.”
## 3
[Devāpi:] “Place heaven-bright speech in us, in our mouth, o Br̥haspati,  speech that is invigorating and free from affliction,
by which we two will win rain for Śaṃtanu. The honeyed drop of
heaven has entered (me).”
## 4
[Śaṃtanu?:] “Let the honeyed drops enter us. O Indra, give a thousand  (cows) with a chariot in addition.
Sit down to the office of Hotar; sacrifice according to the ritual
sequence. O Devāpi, honor the gods with an oblation.”
## 5
The seer Devāpi, the son of R̥ṣṭisena, sitting down to the office of  Hotar, cognizant of the favor of the gods —
he sent the heavenly rainwaters gushing from the higher to the
lower sea.
## 6
In this higher sea the waters stood still, confined by the gods.
They ran, sent gushing by the son of R̥ṣṭisena, impelled by Devāpi in  currycomb tracks [=rivulets].
## 7
When Devāpi, installed as Purohita for Śaṃtanu and chosen for the  office of Hotar, reflected with longing,
Br̥haspati, bestowing, gave him speech audible to the gods,
winning rain.
## 8
O Agni, you whom Devāpi kindled—the son of R̥ṣṭisena, belonging to  Manu’s line, himself blazing—
cheered on by all the gods, rouse forth Parjanya who brings rain.
## 9
To you the ancient seers came with their songs; to you (now) all (come)  at the ceremonies, o much invoked one.
For us there are thousands (of cows), with a chariot in addition. Drive  here to our sacrifice, o you of the chestnut horses.
## 10
These nine and ninety thousand, along with a chariot in addition, are  offered in you, Agni.
With them strengthen your many bodies, o champion. Aroused, grant  us rain from heaven.

## 11
These ninety thousand, o Agni—present them to the bull Indra as  his share.
Knowing the paths leading to the gods in proper order, set Aulāna
among the gods in heaven.
## 12
Agni, thrust away scorners, away difficult depths; ward off affliction, off  demonic forces.
From this sea of lofty heaven for us send an abundance of waters
gushing upon us.