+++
title = "099"

+++
99 (925)
Indra
Vamra Vaikhānasa
12 verses: triṣṭubh
In this very obscure hymn the exact contents and referents in each verse are almost  impossible to interpret and identify, and much of the translation is therefore provi sional. On the other hand, the structure and progression of the hymn are surprisingly  clear. Although it is an Indra hymn, at least according to the Anukramaṇī, the name  Indra does not appear until the very last verse, the poet’s summary verse (12b), and  then only once. In fact the hymn contains almost no divine names: Rudras (in the  plural, perhaps of the Maruts, perhaps not, in vs. 5) and Varuṇa in a simile in verse  10. The first four verses contain no names at all, and though subsequent verses do  contain a number of them, most of these are names of enemies or of mortals aided  by the gods. As in many other difficult hymns the avoidance of names seems to be  meant to keep the referents deliberately unclear, and the contorted phraseology and  allusions to otherwise unknown stories, especially in the earlier parts of the hymn,  seem designed to keep the audience guessing and in some cases to deliberately mis
lead them. As the hymn goes on, Indra’s identity becomes clearer, as in verse 9 with  the Śuṣṇa/Kutsa saga. (On this obscure verse see also Jamison 2009d [2013].) The grammar mirrors this gradual progress toward the recognition and perhaps the  epiphany of Indra. The hymn begins in verse 1 with questions about the identity of  the referents, an indication of maximal uncertainty. The next seven and a half verses  (2–9ab) display an advance toward certainty: almost every half-verse begins with the  pronoun sá “he,” suggesting that the poet has a definite referent in mind, however  vague it may be to the audience. But sá is a discourse pronoun: it does not indicate  where the referent is located. Starting with the second half of verse 9 the next four  half-verses begin with a form of the deictic pronoun ayám “this one here,” strongly  pointing to a referent in the immediate vicinity of the speaker. These ayám forms may  signal the actual presence, the epiphany, of Indra, arrived at the sacrificial ground.
## 01
Which bright bellower of ours do you, taking cognizance, send speeding  along the broad earth for strengthening?
What is his share of strength at the break of dawn? He fashioned the  mace that overcomes obstacles; he made it swell. 2. For he pursues the melody with his flashing, with his lightning. He has  taken his seat upon the broad womb through his lordliness.
Together with the nest-mates and not without his brother, he is the one  who prevails over the magic tricks of the seventh.
## 03
He is the one who drives to the prize, though going with a (horse?)  whose “off” foot is lame [?]. At the winning of the sun, intending to  win he laid siege to it,
when, unassailable, smashing the phallus-worshipers, with his form he  prevailed over the property of (the place?) with a hundred doors.
## 04
He pours out the youthful streams, while as charger running for the  cows that are at stake,
when those in harness, though lacking feet and chariots, having wooden  cups as horses, move toward the ghee, the water.
## 05
Together with the Rudras, the Craftsman, whose wish is unpraiseworthy  but who keeps disrepute at a distance, has come here, abandoning
his house.
This reminds me of the ant couple who were away from their lair,
and (someone), approaching and stealing their food, made
(them) weep.
## 06
Just he, the household lord, subdued the mightily roaring Dāsa, with his  six eyes and three heads.
Grown strong through his might, Trita smashed the boar with his
metal-tipped poetic inspiration.
## 07
Rising up for Manu, he will propel his arrow at the deceitful Arśasāna. He, most manly, well-born from Nahus and from us, split the fortresses  at the smashing of the Dasyus, as was his due.
## 08
He, like a storm-cloud streaming water upon the pasture-land, finds a  way to a peaceful dwelling for us.
When he reverently approaches the (soma-)drop with his limbs, the
falcon with claws of metal smashes the Dasyus.
## 09
Along with his (men) swelling with strength, (he smashed) the arrogant  ones. He handed Śuṣṇa over to Kutsa for the Karpan [?].
This one here led the poet who was being praised, who won his cloak  and was the winner among superior men.
## 10
This one here, showing his favor along with his manly (men), wondrous  together with the gods, is a master of magic power like Varuṇa.
This one here, the lad who drinks according to the ritual sequence,
has been found. He gave his (full) measure against Araru, who was
four-footed.
## 11
Auśija R̥jiśvan, through his praises to him, burst the cowpen of Pipru  together with the bull.
When the one worthy of the sacrifice possesses the pressed soma and  the song will shine, (then), being implored, with his form he (will)
prevail over the fortresses.

## 12
In just this way, o lord, for the increase of the great one, Little Ant  [/Vamraka, the poet] on his many feet crept up to Indra.
He, being implored, will create well-being for him. Refreshment,
nourishment, a good dwelling—all that has he brought.