+++
title = "100"

+++
100 (926)
All Gods
Duvasyu Vāndana
12 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 12
The most salient characteristic of this hymn is its full-pāda refrain, found in the  first eleven of its twelve verses: “we choose wholeness (sarvátātim) and innocence  (áditim).” (Geldner takes the latter as the proper name of the goddess Aditi, from  whom we wish to obtain our choice, but not only is there no Ādityan flavor to this  hymn, but such a double accusative construction is otherwise unknown with the  root √vR̥“choose.”) At first, with its abstract and somewhat moral cast, this refrain  seems unrelated to the content of the verses in which it is placed, but as the hymn  proceeds its relevance becomes clearer.
The hymn begins with a celebration of the soma sacrifice and the gods who par take of it, especially Indra (vs. 1) and Vāyu (vs. 2)—the latter marking the ritual as  the Morning Pressing—with Savitar, the “Impeller,” providing the impetus to the  ritual activity (vss. 1, 3). But it slowly becomes clear that the sacrifice is not simply  a physical procedure, but is intimately bound up with our emotional well-being (see  esp. vss. 5c and 6c). Moreover, in verse 7 it becomes the site of our declaration of  innocence before the gods, a sort of “truth formulation,” though without all the  formal marks of the truth formulation. At this point the refrain becomes an integral  part of the verse to which it is attached. Having thus affirmed our blamelessness, we  can now ask for the dangers that beset us to be banished (vss. 8–9) and for prosperity  and healing to attend us (vs. 10). That the soma sacrifice is the setting for these pleas  and that the elements of the ritual facilitate their fulfillment is shown by the promi
nence of the pressing stones (vss. 8–9) and the mixing milk for the soma (vs. 10). The happy conclusion of the sacrifice is depicted in verse 11, the last verse with the  refrain. The final verse (12), in a different meter, is a somewhat curious mixture. The first  half is addressed to an unidentified referent—quite possibly Agni, since the compound  “having bright radiance” is ordinarily used of him (though once of Indra and once  of Savitar)—with a slightly sinister reminder slipped into the second pāda that there  are still enemies around who are thriving. The second half looks like a fragment of a  dānastuti, but there are no further clues as to how it might fit into the rest of the hymn.
## 1
O Indra, stand fast, bounteous one. A thing like you is to be enjoyed.  Praised as the soma-drinker, be here for our strengthening.
Let Savitar, along with the gods, further our (speech, so it is) heard. – We  choose wholeness and innocence. 2. Bring forward for the taking a portion at the proper time, for Vāyu who  drinks the pure soma, roaring in his quest,
who has attained the drinking of the gleaming milk. – We choose
wholeness and innocence.
## 3
May God Savitar impel vitality here to our sacrificer, the soma-presser  who aims straight,
so that we may attend upon the gods guilelessly. – We choose wholeness  and innocence.
## 4
Let Indra be benevolent toward us always; let King Soma stay mindful  of our welfare,
in the same way that (pacts) concluded by allies bind (them [=allies])  together. – We choose wholeness and innocence.
## 5
Indra with his vast power has appropriated the articulation (of the  sacrifice?) along with our hymn. O Br̥haspati, you are the lengthener  of lifetime.
The sacrifice is Manu, for it is solicitude, is certainly a father to us. – We  choose wholeness and innocence.
## 6
Indra’s is the well-made divine might; Agni is the singer in the house,  the wise poet.
And the sacrifice has become our dear intimate at the rite of
distribution. – We choose wholeness and innocence.
## 7
Neither in secret nor in the open have we done to you much ill-doing,  angering to the gods, you good ones.
Let no one of us be of the shape of untruth, o gods. – We choose
wholeness and innocence.
## 8
Away and downward may Savitar impel affliction; even more widely let  the stones drive it away,
when the honey-pressing pressing-stone is given lofty voice. – We
choose wholeness and innocence.
## 9
Let the pressing stone be upright when the soma-presser is there, o good  ones; keep all hatreds away at a distance.
God Savitar is to be reverently invoked as our protector. – We choose  wholeness and innocence.
## 10
O Cows, eat nourishment in the pasture, eat fat, you who are anointed  in the cup, at the seat of truth.
Let just this body be medicine for the body. – We choose wholeness and  innocence.
## 11
The singer bringing to fulfillment his conception is a help for each and  every one; Indra himself is auspicious solicitude for those who have
pressed the soma,
whose heavenly udder is full for pouring. – We choose wholeness and  innocence.

## 12
Bright is your radiance—your superiority brings your conception to  fulfillment. (But still) there exist unassailable opponents who bring
their own old age to fulfillment.
The one offering friendship seeks to rush in the straightest line to round  up the foremost of bovine stock.