+++
title = "101"

+++
101 (927)
Priests
Budha Saumya
12 verses: triṣṭubh, except gāyatrī 4–6, br̥hatī 5, jagatī 9, 12
Addressed to the priests of the soma sacrifice, this charming hymn first likens their  ritual activities to various kinds of manual labor, especially farm labor (vss. 3–4).  The preparation of soma is then compared to raising water from a well (vss. 5–7)  for livestock. The preparation of the soma advances through a series of changing  images (vss. 8–10), ending with a surprisingly eroticized pair of verses (11–12).
## 1
Wake up of one mind, o comrades. Kindle the fire together, you who are  many, but from the same nest.
I call down Dadhikrā, Agni, and goddess Dawn, all accompanied by  Indra, to aid you.
## 2
Make things delightful; stretch out your insightful thoughts (on the  loom); make a boat that crosses (the water) with its oars.
Set your weapons in order; prepare them right. Lead the sacrifice forth  to the east, comrades.
## 3
Hitch up the plows; stretch the yokes across; in a prepared womb strew  the seed here.
If the hearing will be commensurate with our song, the ripe (grain)
should come even closer to our sickles.
## 4
The poets hitch up the plows; they stretch the yokes across separately— the insightful ones in search of favor among the gods.
## 5
Bring out the buckets; fasten the cords together.
Let us dip out the watery wellspring that is easy to dip, unfailing.
## 6
The wellspring with its buckets prepared, with good cords, easy to dip, watery, unfailing do I dip.
## 7
Make the horses happy: you will win the (prize that is) set. Just make  your chariot one that brings well-being.
Dip out the wellspring whose buckets are the wooden (soma) cups, its  wheel the (pressing) stone, its cask the (sheep’s fleece) sheathing, and  which gives drink to men.
## 8
Make a pen (for it), for it gives drink to your men. Stitch (for it) (suits of)  armor, ample and broad.
Make (for it) fortresses, metal and unassailable. Let the beaker not
leak: make it solid. 9. I turn toward you an insightful thought worthy of the sacrifice, for aid,  o gods—a sacrificial goddess worthy of the sacrifice here.
She should yield her milk to us like a great cow with her milk in a
thousand streams who has gone to the pastures.
## 10
Pour out the tawny (soma) into the lap of wood. Fashion (it [=wooden  cup]) with axes made of stone.
Embrace (him [=Soma]) with ten girthbands. Yoke the draft-horse to  the two chariot-poles.
## 11
The plodding draft-animal goes between the two chariot-poles like a  man with two wives in bed [/into the vulva].
Make the lord of the wood [=tree/soma] stand in the wood. Set (it)
down well, without digging out the spring.
## 12
The penis, the penis—raise it up, men. Rouse (it), stick (it in), to win  the prize.
Hurry the son of Niṣṭigrī hither, for help, urgently (hurry) Indra here  for soma-drinking.