+++
title = "103"

+++
103 (929)
Indra (1–3, 5–11), Br̥haspati (4), Āpva (12), Indra or  the Maruts (13)
Apratiratha Aindra
13 verses: triṣṭubh, except anuṣṭubh 13
A martial hymn, dense with expressions of overwhelming power and victorious might.  The early parts of the hymn present Indra as the unconquerable conqueror. Stylistically  this part is marked by repetition and especially by the chaining of key lexical items  from the end of one verse to the beginning of the next. Curiously, X.84, a hymn to  “Battle Fury,” also shows this type of concatenation, and so it may be that stitching  verses together in this way creates a sort of magically impenetrable verbal armor.
In the course of the hymn the focus shifts from exclusive concentration on Indra  to our warriors and the inspiration Indra’s model should provide for them to per form heroically in battle. Our men are first addressed already in the second half of  verse 2, but it is in verse 6 and then in verses 10–13 that the application of Indra’s  behavior to that of our men and the transference of his skills and courage to them  really come to the fore.
## 01
Swift, honing himself as a fearsome bull (does its horns), smiting again  and again, the agitator of the settled domains who makes them cry out together, the unwinking lone hero—he
conquered a hundred armies all at once—Indra.
## 02
With him, who makes (them) cry out together, who is unwinking,  conquering, combat-creating, difficult to shake, bold—
with Indra now conquer, now overwhelm the combatants, o men—with  the bull with arrows in his hand.
## 03
He together with those with arrows in their hands, he together with  those having quivers, willful Indra, with his throng, who is the one to  send the combatants surging together,
conquering those sent surging together, drinking the soma, arrogant in  his arms, the archer of mighty bow having his (arrows) aimed.
## 04
Br̥haspati, fly around with your chariot, as demon-smasher repelling  those without alliance.
Shattering the armies, pulverizing them, conquering in combat, be the  helper of our chariots.
## 05
Recognizable by his power, stalwart, a hero at the fore, a prizewinner  with overwhelming strength, overwhelming and mighty,
a hero on attack, a warrior on attack, born of overwhelming
strength—o Indra, mount the conquering chariot as the finder of
cattle.
## 06
The splitter of the cowpen, the finder of cows, the one with the mace in  his arms, winning the course, pulverizing with his might—
show your heroism in imitation of that one, you kinfolks; pull
yourselves together in imitation of him, you comrades.
## 07
Plunging toward the cowpens with overwhelming strength, the hero  without mercy, Indra of the hundredfold battle-fury,
difficult to shake, overwhelming in battle, impossible to combat—let  him further our armies in the combats.
## 08
Let Indra (go in front) as their leader, let Br̥haspati, the priestly gift, the  sacrifice, the soma go in front;
let the Maruts go to the forefront of the shattering, conquering armies  of the gods.
## 09
Of Indra the bull and of Varuṇa the king—mighty their troop of  Ādityas and of Maruts—
of the great-minded, earth-shaking, conquering gods the battle-cry has  arisen.
## 10
Make our weapons bristle up, o bounteous one—up the minds of my  own little warriors,
up, o Vr̥tra-smasher, the competitive spirits of the competitors. Up let  the battle-cries of the conquering chariots go.
## 11
Ours is Indra when the battle flags clash. Our arrows—let them conquer. Our heroes—let them have the upper (hand). Help us amid the calls (to  you), o gods.

## 12
Confusing the perception of those yonder, seize their limbs, o Lady  Panic, and go away.
Go forth against them; with flames burn them in their hearts. Let those  without alliance keep company with blind darkness.
## 13
Go forth and conquer, o men. Let Indra offer you shelter.
Let your arms be mighty so that you will be unassailable.