+++
title = "104"

+++
104 (930)
Indra
Aṣṭaka Vaiśvāmitra
11 verses: triṣṭubh
The poet of this hymn is identified as a descendant of Viśvāmitra, and the hymn  ends (vs. 11) with the Viśvāmitra refrain found in most of the Indra hymns of the  IIIrd Maṇḍala (III.31.22, etc.). Like X.89, another Indra hymn of the Xth Maṇḍala  ascribed to a Vaiśvāmitra and ending with the same refrain, this hymn seems like  a self-consciously old-fashioned composition, falling squarely into the genre of  “journey” hymn, in which Indra is invited to come with his horses to the soma
pressing. That praise poetry is at least equally important as soma at the sacrifice is  made abundantly clear throughout the hymn. Toward the end (starting with vs. 8),  the hymn turns to the topic of the Vr̥tra myth and, especially, Indra’s freeing of the  waters after his defeat of Vr̥tra.
## 01
The soma has been pressed for you, o much-invoked one. With your pair  of fallow bays, drive swiftly to the sacrifice.
The songs, having poets for heroes, making their way, have run to you,  Indra. Drink of the pressed soma.
## 02
You of the fallow bays, drink here of (the soma) rinsed in the waters,  pressed by our men—fill your belly!—
which the stones have trickled for you, Indra. With these (soma drinks)  increase your exhilaration, o you whose conveyance is hymns.
## 03
I rouse forth the drink of pressed soma, mighty and true, for the bull— for you to drive forth, o possessor of the fallow bays.
Indra, make yourself exhilarated here with our nourishing streams, while  being ably hymned with all our insightful thoughts.
## 04
By your help, able one, and your heroic might, the fire-priests who know  the truth, acquiring the vigor
that brings offspring, have taken their place in the house of Manu, o  Indra, singing and sharing in the exhilaration.
## 05
Through your guidance—you of good praise, of good favor, and of  much radiance, o master of the fallow bays—the peoples,
your praisers, are acquiring your most bounteous help to bring them  across—and through your liberal gifts, Indra. 6. O you of the fallow bays, drive near to our sacred formulations with  your pair of fallow bays to drink of the pressed soma.
Indra, the sacrifice has reached you, patiently waiting. You are the
pious sign of the rite.
## 07
The bounteous one having a thousand prizes, vanquishing hostility,  delighting in the pressing, (receiving) well-twisted (hymns)—
unopposable Indra do the songs attend upon. In the singer’s desire to  do homage they express wonder at Indra.
## 08
Seven are the divine waters, very delightful and unharmable, by which  you, Indra, the stronghold-splitter, crossed the boundary river,
the ninety and nine streaming streams. You found the way for the gods  and for Manu.
## 09
You freed the great waters from their curse, and you, the god, alone  kept watch over them.
Indra, those (waters) that you made at the overcoming of Vr̥tra, with  these you should thrive in body throughout a whole lifetime.
## 10
The resolve proper to a hero—that’s Indra, who (receives) good
praises; (the good praise) as well as the (soma-)stream summon the
much-invoked one.
He shook Vr̥tra to pieces; he made wide space; as the able one, as
superiority (itself), he vanquished the battle arrays.
## 11
– For blessing we would invoke bounteous Indra, most manly, at this  raid, at the winning of the prize of victory,
the strong one who listens, (we would invoke) for help in battles, him  who smashes obstacles, the winner of prizes.