+++
title = "105"

+++
105 (931)
Indra
Durmitra Kautsa or Sumitra Kautsa
11 verses: predominately uṣṇih (per Anukramaṇī)
The meter of this hymn is, to say the least, highly irregular and variable from verse  to verse. Despite the Anukramaṇī analysis it is better analyzed as consisting mainly  of verses with a seven-syllable middle pāda, and one or more triṣṭubh pādas before  and/or after. See Oldenberg (1888: 158–59).
The hymn also poses many problems of interpretation, and the metrical and ver bal anomalies have led many commentators to consider the text corrupt—a judg ment by which we are tempted. Even if not corrupt, the text is stylistically abrupt,  contorted, and compressed, and many puzzles remain unsolved. The hymn also  appears to be jocular in places, making sly fun of Indra and cutting him down  to size. This is especially clear in the section devoted to Indra’s pair of fallow bay  horses (vss. 2–5), where the poet implies that without his horses Indra is nothing

much: it’s the horses that give him prestige (see esp. vss. 3–4). The sections concern ing his weapon (vss. 6–7) and the sacrifice (vss. 8–10) accord Indra more of his usual  glory, but still in oblique phraseology.
## 01
When, o good one, for (you) who yearn for praise, will your beard  descend to the water,
to the (soma) long pressed for (you) whose friendship is sought
[/befriended by the wind]?
## 02
You who pursue your two fallow bays, well yoked but possessing  separate commandments, the steeds *with slender penises,
the two with manes like two lines—you, the houselord—
## 03
Apart from which two Indra stays stock-still, like an exhausted mortal  overcome by fear.
(But) when he, the forceful, has yoked them for beauty,
## 04
Together with them Indra will ever be famed—(though) he’s (just) their  sidecar and providing (them) service—
together with the two roarers with their separate commandments Indra  (will be famed) as a champion.
## 05
He who has mounted on the maned pair, as if on the two of broad  expanse [=Heaven and Earth?], to prosper,
the fair-lipped one wins (the soma?) with his pair of lips.
## 06
He of lofty might has struck up the praise song with the lofty ones. The  champion fashioned it with his swelling strength,
like an artisan [/R̥bhu] in accord with his intentions, (like?) Mātariśvan. 7. Who made his own mace, to smash the Dasyu easily—he,
golden-colored, golden,
with unbroken jaw, is like the infallible airy realm [?].
## 08
Grind down the crooked things for us. By our verse might we vanquish  those without verses.
Not without sacred formulations is our individual sacrifice, while you  are taking pleasure in it.
## 09
When the threefold one has become upright for you upon the yokepoles  of the sacrifice, in its place,
then, jointly with these two [=horses?], (make?/board?) a boat that has  its own glory.
## 10
For splendor is your dappled pourer, for splendor your spotless ladle, with which you pour up into your own vessel.
## 11
Whether a hundred are counter(part) to you, lordly one, Sumitra has  praised (you) in just this way, Durmitra has praised (you) in just
this way,
in that you helped Kutsa’s son in the smashing of Dasyus, in that you  furthered Kutsa’s kid in the smashing of Dasyus.