+++
title = "106"

+++
106 (932)
Aśvins
Bhūtāṃśa Kāśyapa
11 verses: triṣṭubh
There is no question that this is the most frustrating hymn in the R̥gveda. Structured  like another Aśvin hymn, II.39, it presents a blizzard of similes—generally one each  pāda, four to a verse—with the two gods compared to all manner of animals, people,  body parts, and cosmic features. Unfortunately the style goes far beyond the recon
dite to the utterly incomprehensible, with impossible hapaxes of unusual morpho logical structure, seemingly in part driven by phonological play. These words may  be archaic or dialectal or slang or belong to specific technical fields or borrowed/ adapted from a substrate language or playfully generated from morphological tem plates—or, as has been suggested, the middle section may be written in a kind of
code, with phoneme-by-phoneme substitution. Or all of the above, and more. In any case, following the eminently sensible lead of Geldner (implicitly endorsed  by Oldenberg and Renou), we have simply left the middle verses (5–8) untranslated,  while attempting to wring sense from the outer frame. Although many ingenious  attempts have been made to interpret the baffling lexical items in this hymn and  more could have been made, such attempts remain just that—exercises in ingenuity.  It seems more honest, as well as truer to the spirit of the hymn, evidently designed  to challenge the decoding skills of the most proficient and experienced hearers, to  acknowledge its impenetrable center. From this several observations emerge. First,  this appears to be the ultimate omphalos hymn. In most omphalos hymns the center  holds the mystery, but the mystery is expressed in words whose purport can be puz zled out. Here that mysterious center deliberately defies analysis by being expressed  in words that are tantalizingly close to familiar word-types, but whose code cannot  be cracked—and rendered all the more frustrating by the presence of real, analyz able words in the midst of the semi-gibberish. The hymn takes the notion of an  omphalos and carries it as far as it can go, suggesting that many mysteries will  remain beyond our apprehension, or at least our apprehension by verbal means. The outer verses (1–4, 9–11) reveal further traces of poetic structure, espe cially when compared with II.39 mentioned above. The parallels between the two  hymns seem to be deliberate and self-consciously generated. They begin almost  identically:  the first pāda of II.39.1 (minus the opening simile) reads. . .tád íd  árthaṃ jarethe “you two awaken to just this aim,” in sense and verbal expression  almost identical to our ubhā́ u nūnáṃ tád íd arthayethe “Now you both have just  this as your aim,” with the “awaken” postponed until pāda c. The final verses of  both hymns (II.39.8, X.106.11) are summary verses, announcing the hymn just  completed (interestingly called a mantra in this hymn) and urging the Aśvins to  drive to the hymn and the sacrifice. In between are a varying number of verses,  constructed as webs of similes, most of which are more complex and clever than  the general run of R̥gvedic similes. It thus seems that this hymn-type provides a

template, which could generate within it an unlimited number of inventive com parisons. It is not hard to imagine this process as a competitive one, with poets  vying to use the most outré words and over-strained and mannered images, all  contained and controlled by the overall structure of the template. In our hymn we  return to discipline from the unruly center via several verses of reasonably com prehensible similes (vss. 9–10) to reach, with some relief, the safe shore of verse  11. (It may not be entirely fanciful to suggest that the first simile in the return  verses [9a] promises “firm standing in the depths”—something the audience has  surely been seeking, in vain.)
## 01
Now you both have just this as your aim: you stretch out insights like  workers their cloths.
It has awakened you two to drive toward a common goal. You haul
provisions here as you do the day-bright (days).
## 02
Like plow-oxen [?] you are fixed in [/to] the pharvara; like brawny  lead-horses [?] you follow instructions.
Because you are like messengers who acquire glory among the peoples,  do not stay away like buffalo from a waterhole.
## 03
Joined together like the wings of a bird, conspicuous like livestock,  come here to our sacrificial formula.
Shining like the fire of a man who seeks the gods, like two encircling the  earth you perform sacrifice in many places.
## 04
(I call upon you,) who are like friends to us, as sons do their parents— like powerful (Heaven and Earth) with their light, like kings for
triumph,
like energetic (herdsmen) for prosperity, like the two labia for
enjoyment. Like obedient (servants), come here to my call.
## 05
váṃsageva pūṣaryā̀ śimbā́tā mitréva r̥tā́ śatárā śā́tapantā
vā́jevoccā́ váyasā gharmyeṣṭhā́ méṣeveṣā́ saparyā̀ púrīṣā
## 06
sr̥ṇyèva jarbhárī turphárītū naitośéva turphárī parpharī́kā
udanyajéva jémanā maderū́ tā́ me jarā́yv ajáram marā́yu
## 07
pajréva cárcaraṃ jā́ram marā́yu, kṣádmevā́rtheṣu tartarītha ugrā
r̥bhū́ nā́pat kharamajrā́ kharájrur, vāyúr ná parpharat kṣayad rayīṇā́m
## 08
gharméva mádhu jaṭháre sanérū, bhágevitā turphárī phā́rivā́ram
pataréva cacarā́ candránirṇiṅ, mánar̥ṅgā mananyā̀ ná jágmī
## 09
Like the two lofty (world-halves) you will find firm standing in the  depths, as his feet do for a man crossing a ford,
for like two ears you will remember our instructions. Like Share and  Portion, apportion to us a conspicuous reward.
## 10
Like āraṅgara you produce (the milk) in the cow whose opening is  below, as bees produce honey,
like plowmen sweating out their sweat. Like earth, (a cow) that feeds on  good pasture, you are accompanied by nourishment. 11. Might we bring our praise song to fulfillment and might we win the  prize of victory. Sharing the same chariot, drive here—you two—
right up to our mantra
and to the cooked honey within the cows, as if to glory. Bhūtāṃśa has  fulfilled the desire of the Aśvins.