+++
title = "107"

+++
107 (933) Daksiṇ ̣ā (Priestly Gift) or Its Givers
Divya Āṅgirasa or Dakṣiṇā Prājāpatyā
11 verses: triṣṭubh, except jagatī 4
These extravagant praises of the dakṣiṇā (“priestly gift”), which is given by the  sacrificer to the various priests who officiate at his sacrifice, are clearly in the poet’s  interests, as he stands to receive a portion of the sacrificer’s largesse. The hymn sel dom strays from its point—that a dakṣiṇā, once given, brings untold benefits to the  giver, both material and spiritual, far exceeding the value of the original gift. It is a  persuasive, if somewhat monotone, piece of work.
## 1
Their great generosity has been revealed. All life has been freed from  darkness;
the great light, given by the forefathers, has come. The wide path for the  priestly gift has become visible.
## 2
High above in heaven have they taken their stand—those providing the  priestly gift. Those who give horses, they (come) together with the sun; those giving gold receive a share in immortality; those giving garments  extend their own lifetime, o Soma.
## 3
The priestly gift is the divine bestowal, a sacrificial offering to the gods; it  is not for the stingy, for they do not bestow.
But many men who present priestly gifts bestow through fear of disgrace. 4. Those with manly sight see (it as) the wind with its hundred streams (of  rain), (as) the chant that finds the sun; they see (it as) the oblation.
Those who bestow and present at the (sacrificial) assembly, they milk the  priestly gift with its seven mothers.
## 5
The provider of the priestly gift goes as the first invited; the provider of  the priestly gift goes to the front as the leader of the horde.
I think just he is the lord of peoples—the one who first sought out the  priestly gift.
## 6
They say that just he is the seer, he the creator of sacred formulations,  the leader of the sacrifice, the singer of chants, the reciter of
solemn words.
He knows the three bodies of the blazing one—he who first found
success with the priestly gift.

## 7
The priestly gift gives the horse; the priestly gift the cow; the priestly  gift the lustrous and what is golden.
The priestly gift wins the food that is our very lifebreath. He who
understands makes the priestly gift his armor.
## 8
The benefactors have not died, nor have they gone to a failed end; the  benefactors are not harmed, nor do they falter.
What is this whole world and the sun, all this does the priestly gift give  to them.
## 9
The benefactors at first won the sweet-smelling womb; the benefactors  won a bride who is richly dressed.
The benefactors won the right to the inner drinking of liquor. The
benefactors won (against those) who come forward uninvited.
## 10
For the benefactor they groom the swift horse; for the benefactor the  maiden sits waiting, making herself beautiful.
This dwelling of the benefactor is like a lotus-pond, adorned and
shimmering like the palaces of the gods.
## 11
The steadily conveying horses convey the benefactor. Rolling easily, the  chariot of the priestly gift rolls on.
O gods, help the benefactor in the raids. The benefactor will win against  his rivals at the encounters (with them).