+++
title = "108"

+++
108 (934)
Saramā and the Paṇis
Saramā and Paṇis
11 verses: triṣṭubh
In the interpretation of this well-known and delightful dialogue hymn we follow the  compelling study by Hanns-Peter Schmidt in his Br̥haspati und Indra (1968: 185– 89). This dialogue takes place in the midst of a narrative whose outlines are clear,  even if its details are not. The Paṇis have entrapped cattle in a cave. Indra and the  ancient Vedic seers wish to release the cattle. Therefore, Indra sends his dog Saramā to track down the Paṇis and to demand the release of the cattle. She crosses the  Rasā, the river at the border of the world that separates heaven and earth, and finds  the Paṇis. The Paṇis refuse to surrender the cattle, however, and at the end Indra  and the seers—the Aṅgirases and Navagvas—themselves come to the place where  the Paṇis have hidden the cattle. They break open the cave through the power of  the hymns they compose and chant. Because Indra’s weapon in this story is not the  vajra, the mace with which he destroys Vr̥tra, but the truth embodied in the hymns  that Indra and the seers recite, Indra is here called Br̥haspati, “Lord of the Sacred  Formulation.”
The story also tells of the coming of the dawns, since the power of Indra’s and  the seer’s words lies in the secret truth that the cattle are the dawns. Note that at the end, the poet uses the power of this truth for his own ends: through the truth of his  hymn, he should acquire or recover cattle.
Despite the seriousness of the theme, it is hard to believe that the audience did  not relish the depiction of a talking dog, especially one as saucy and forthright as  the faithful Saramā, who resists the offered blandishments of the Paṇis, to remain  loyal to her master Indra.
## 01
[Paṇi:] Seeking what has Saramā arrived here, for far is the road,
swallowing up (the traveler) in the distance?
What is your mission to us? What was the final turn (bringing you here)?  How did you cross the waters of the Rasā?
## 02
[Saramā:] Sent as the messenger of Indra I travel, seeking your great  hidden treasuries, Paṇis.
With a fear of leaping across—that helped us!—in that way I crossed the  waters of the Rasā.
## 03
[Paṇi:] Of what sort is Indra, Saramā? What is his appearance?—he as  whose messenger you raced here from afar?
If he will come here, we will make an alliance with him, and then he will  become the cowherd of our cattle.
## 04
[Saramā:] I know him not as one who can be deceived. He will deceive!— he as whose messenger I raced here from afar.
Deep flowing rivers do not hide him. Smashed by Indra, Paṇis, you will  lie still.
## 05
[Paṇi:] These cattle that you sought, Saramā, as you were flying around  the ends of heaven, fortunate one—
who will release them to you without a fight? And our battle weapons  are sharp!
## 06
[Saramā:] Your words are no weapons, Paṇis! Let your evil bodies be  impervious to arrows
or let the path to you be impossible to follow—either way, Br̥haspati will  have no mercy on you!
## 07
[Paṇi:] This treasury with its foundation of rock is overflowing with cows,  horses, and goods, Saramā.
The Paṇis, who are good herdsmen, guard it. In vain have you come on  an empty track.
## 08
[Saramā:] The seers, sharpened by soma, will come here to this
place: Ayāsya [=Indra], the Aṅgirases, and the Navagvas.
They will divide up this pen of cattle. Then will the Paṇis just vomit this  speech (of theirs)!
## 09
[Paṇi:] Even though you have come in this way, Saramā, compelled by  divine power,
I shall make you my sister. Do not go back. We will give away a portion  of the cows to you, fortunate one.1574 X.109
## 10
[Saramā:] I know no brotherhood and no sisterhood. Indra and the  terrifying Aṅgirases, they know (these things).
They seemed to me desirous of cattle when I came. Go away from here,  Paṇis, a very long way!
## 11
[Narrator:] Go far from here, Paṇis, a very long way! Exchanging places  with the truth, let the cows come up
which Br̥haspati found hidden—he and the soma, the pressing stones,  and the inspired seers.