+++
title = "109"

+++
109 (935) All Gods
Juhū Brahmajayā or Ūrdhvanābhan Brāhma
7 verses: triṣṭubh, except anuṣṭubh 6–7
This short hymn has provoked much discussion, but, in our opinion, it has not  been well served by its commentators. The topic of the hymn is the “Brahmin’s  wife,” mentioned explicitly in verses 2–7, and in particular the “giving back” of  the Brahmin’s wife. The currently prevailing opinion about the hymn (see espe
cially Geldner and Doniger O’Flaherty) is that it represents an early version of  the story in the Viṣṇu Purāṇa (IV.6.5) in which King Soma abducts the wife of  Br̥haspati, the guru of the gods, and ultimately is forced to return her. Needless  to say, the chronological difference—the several millennia intervening between  the R̥gveda and the Viṣṇu Purāṇa—should make this connection a disfavored one  unless no other possible interpretations can be found. And it is also the case that  the R̥gvedic hymn lacks almost all the salient features of the purāṇic story, includ
ing the abduction.
We instead believe that the hymn relates to the much-debated issue in the late  R̥gveda about the introduction of the Sacrificer’s Wife into ritual performance (see,  e.g., nearby X.102), and that the poet both recognizes the perils of this new ritual  practice and reassures his audience that all will be well. The hymn has an omphalos  structure: the first and last verses (1 and 7) concern the “offense” (kílbiṣa) implicitly  done to the Brahmin (husband of the woman in question) by separating him from  his wife and placing her in the ritual arena, where she interacts with the gods and  acts as conduit of the fearsome forces unleashed by the sacrifice. Her contact with  the gods is potentially adulterous, and, given the power of the gods, there is also  the danger that they will not want to release her at the end of the ritual. But these  possible dangers do not arise: the inner ring of the hymn (vss. 2, 6) emphatically  states that the gods have given her back without rancor, and the kílbiṣa is expiated  in the final verse (7).
The middle verses (3–5) concern the wife’s activities on the ritual ground and  their importance. It is she who “places what is difficult to place in the highest dis tant heaven” (vs. 4), in our view a reference to her role in mediating between the earthly and divine realms especially in the animal sacrifice: she figuratively depos its the oblation in heaven by touching and ritually preparing the sacrificed ani mal. The most difficult verse is 5, which also contains the only R̥gvedic occurrence  of the word brahmacārín (already in the Atharvaveda a word for “Vedic student”  and later a standard way of referring to a man practicing chastity). Although the  verse remains enigmatic, it is possible that it suggests that a single ritual performer  (reciter of formulations) is necessary but not sufficient, and it is for this reason that  the Wife has been introduced into ritual practice.
The hymn is also saturated with wedding vocabulary (“grasp the hand,” “lead,”  etc.). This domestic ritual, in which man and wife participate jointly, provides a  reassuring model for the wife’s foray into the more solemn and serious realm of  śrauta ritual.
For more detailed discussion, see Jamison (forthcoming b).
## 1
These were the first to speak at the offense against the
Brahmin: boundless Ocean, Mātariśvan,
powerful ascetic Fervor, staunch in rage but joy itself, the divine Waters,  first born by their truth.
## 2
Soma the king first gave back the Brahmin’s wife, without being angry. Varuṇa as ally was her escort; Agni, the Hotar, having grasped (her) by  the hand, led (her) here.
## 3
The deposit is to be grasped only by her hand, just when they have  announced: “Here is the Brahmin’s wife.”
She does not stand for sending a messenger. In this way is the kingship  of the ruler protected.
## 4
The ancient gods and the seven seers, who settled down to ascetic fervor,  conversed about her:
“Fearsome is the wife of the Brahmin, when she is led close [/initiated];  she places what is difficult to place in the highest distant heaven.”
## 5
The one who practices formulations keeps constantly laboring at his  labors. He becomes (just) one limb of the gods.
With him Br̥haspati discovered the (Brahmin’s) wife, who was led by  Soma, as (you found) the sacrificial ladle [/tongue (=Agni)], o gods.
## 6
The gods, verily, have given (her) back, and the sons of Manu (have given  her) back;
the kings [=Ādityas], making it come true, have given back the
Brahmin’s wife.
## 7
Having given back the Brahmin’s wife, having made expiation of offense  along with the gods,
having shared in the nourishment of the earth, they reverently approach  wide-ranging (space).
