+++
title = "110"

+++
110 (936)
Āprı̄
Jamadagni Bhārgava or Rāma Jāmadagnya
11 verses: triṣṭubh
One of the ten Āprī hymns in the R̥gveda, structured litanies to be recited at the  animal sacrifice, each verse with its own key word. This hymn follows the stan dard Āprī pattern of course, but is notable for the amount of internal recycling of  phraseology (see the echoes between vss. 2 and 10; 3 and 9; 4, 7, and 10; 4 and 8).  As usual, the key words are italicized.
## 1
Kindled today in the dwelling of Manu, as god you sacrifice to the gods,  o Jātavedas.
And as observant one convey them hither, you possessing Mitra’s might.  You are the messenger, the prescient poet.
## 2
Tanūnapāt, anointing with honey the paths traveling to truth, sweeten  them, you of lovely tongue.
And bringing to fulfillment our mental concepts and our sacrifice
through (your) hymnic visions, make our ceremony (be) among
the gods.
## 3
Being libated, as one to be solemnly invoked and to be extolled, travel here  in concert with the good ones, Agni.
You are the Hotar of the gods, youthful one. Sacrifice to them when
prompted, as superior sacrificer.
## 4
Facing east along the forward direction of the earth, the ritual grass is  twisted at the dawning of this (dawn), in the vanguard of the days.
It spreads out further, more widely, as a comfortable place for the gods,  for Aditi.
## 5
Let the expansive ones gape open widely, beautifying themselves like  wives for their husbands—
you Divine Doors, lofty, setting all in motion, become easy for the gods  to approach.
## 6
Richly fertile, worthy of the sacrifice—let Dawn and Night sit down here  close together in the womb—
heavenly maidens, lofty, with lovely ornaments, assuming brilliantly
adorned splendor.
## 7
The two Divine Hotars, foremost, eloquent, measuring out the sacrifice  of Manu to sacrifice it—
the two bards at the rites, spurring on, directing the east-facing light
along the forward direction (of the earth) [/at their direction].
## 8
Let Bharatī come straightaway to our sacrifice, and Iḍā, making (us)  perceive here [=instructing us] as she did Manu.
Let the three goddesses, (those two and) Sarasvatī, the good workers, sit  here on this ritual grass, a comfortable place. 9. He who (adorned) Heaven and Earth, these two begetters, and who  adorned all the creatures with their forms,
to him today, to god Tvaṣṭar, o Hotar, superior sacrificer, perform
sacrifice here when prompted, as the knowing one.
## 10
Send the oblations downward to the fold of the gods at the proper  season, having anointed them by yourself.
Let the Lord of the Forest, the Butcher, and god Agni sweeten the
oblation with honey and ghee.
## 11
Just born, he measured out the sacrifice at once. Agni became the leader  of the gods.
At the direction of this Hotar, at his word of truth, let the gods eat the  oblation, prepared with the svāhā-cry.