+++
title = "111"

+++
111 (937) Indra
Aṣṭrādaṃṣṭra Vairūpa
10 verses: triṣṭubh
On the one hand, this hymn simply recites, in straightforward but artful fashion,  some of Indra’s most celebrated deeds: the Vala myth and the freeing of the cows/ dawns (vss. 3–4, possibly 2), the Vr̥tra myth and the freeing of the waters (vss. 6,  8–10), with several others glancingly referred to: the propping of heaven and fixation  of the earth (vss. 4–5), the smashing of Śuṣṇa (vs. 5). As often, the Vala and Vr̥tra  myths are sometimes superimposed upon each other, with the cows/dawns of the  former conflated with the waters (also female) of the latter. For example, the first  pāda of verse 8 seems to continue the travels of the Dawns found in verse 7, but the  next pāda makes it clear that the referent is actually the waters of the Vr̥tra myth.
On the other hand, and especially in its first few verses, the hymn concerns itself  with the interaction between poems and deeds. In verse 1 we poets rouse Indra by  making his deeds real, that is, by celebrating them in poetry. In verse 2 the poetry  almost seems to precede and stimulate the deed, and verse 3 provides us a picture  of Indra whose knowledge of his own deeds seems to derive from hearing about  them from poets. If our understanding of verse 4 is correct, the power of poetry to  provoke the deeds it celebrates is put into the mythic past, with the Aṅgirases bring
ing Indra’s feats to realization by their hymns. Although this theme disappears in  the rest of the hymn, to a poetically acute audience its resonances would probably  still be felt in the more conventional treatment of Indra’s deeds that follows.
## 1
Inspired ones, bring forth an inspired thought, in whatever (manifold)  ways men’s thoughts are.
We will rouse Indra here with his deeds made real [=as hymns]. For he is  a hero known to long for song.

## 2
Because the hymnic vision flashed out from the seat of truth, the bull,  born from a heifer, came together with the cows [=Dawns/hymns]. He arose with a powerful roar. He entirely encompassed the dusky  realms, though they are great.
## 3
Indra certainly knows of this, from hearing it. For he was the victorious  path-maker for the sun,
and after that, making a wife from a cow [=Dawn], he became the  husband of the cow and lord of heaven, immovable, ancient born,  unopposable.
## 4
Indra by his greatness confounded the commandments of the great  Flood [=Vala], while being hymned by the Aṅgirases.
He rooted the dusky realms, though they are many—he who buttressed  their buttress by means of (their [=Aṅgirases’] poetic?) realization. 5. Indra is the counterpart of heaven and of earth. He knows all the  pressings; he smites Śuṣṇa.
With the sun he stretched through heaven, though it is great. He also  propped it up with a prop, (himself) a better prop (than the prop). 6. Because with your mace as Vr̥tra-smiter you laid Vr̥tra low, (laid low)  the wiles of the godless one swollen with strength,
you then, bold one, boldly hewed him apart, and so you became  arm-strong, bounteous one.
## 7
When the Dawns kept company with the Sun, their beacons found his  glittering gift,
the heavenly body that appeared here from heaven. No! No one really  knows about its going (away) again.
## 8
Certainly the first of these females have gone into the distance, the  waters that flowed at the impulsion of Indra.
Where is their top, where their bottom? Waters, where is your middle,  where now your end?
## 9
You let loose the rivers that had been swallowed by the serpent. Right  after that they roiled forth at speed—
those seeking release and those that had been released. Then they did  not rest, once pointed down.
## 10
Converging, they went to the river like willing girls. From of old the  stronghold-splitter has been acknowledged as their lover.
To your house have come the earthly goods; to us your many
liberalities, Indra.