+++
title = "112"

+++
112 (938)
Indra
Nabhaḥprebhedana Vairūpa
10 verses: triṣṭubh
A conventional invitation to the soma-drinking, specifically that of the Morning  Pressing (see esp. vs. 1). As usual, Indra is urged to travel to our sacrifice with his  pair of horses (esp. vss. 2, 4) and to drink the soma, whose serving is described. Also  as often, the rival sacrificers who try to tempt Indra to their soma are mentioned  and the superior charms of our offerings are touted (vs. 7). The poet also promises a  verbal performance celebrating Indra’s deeds to accompany the soma offering (vs. 8,  also vs. 1), and a very abbreviated précis of the Vala myth is given in the second half  of verse 8. The final verse (10) expresses our hopes for Indra’s reciprocal generosity.
## 01
Indra, drink of the pressed soma at your pleasure, for the Early-Morning  Pressing, the first drink, is yours.
Excite yourself, to smite the rivals, o champion. With hymns we shall  proclaim your manly deeds.
## 02
Your chariot that is swifter than thought, Indra, with it drive here for  soma-drinking.
Straightaway let your fallow bays run forth here, with which bullish ones  you drive while in exhilaration.
## 03
Cause your body to be touched by the golden luster of the sun, by its  fairest forms.
When you are invoked by us, your comrades, Indra, in common with us,  become exhilarated upon sitting down—
## 04
You, in the raptures of exhilaration, whose greatness these two great  world-halves did not encompass—
Indra, drive here to this home with your yoked fallow bays, to the dear  food with the dear ones.
## 05
Having drunk of it time after time, Indra, you have done in your rivals,  have done inimitable joyous [/martial] (deeds).
It rouses your plenitude and power; Indra, it is pressed for your
exhilaration—the soma!
## 06
Here is your cup acquired of old, Indra: drink soma with it, you of a  hundred resolves.
The trough is full of exhilarating honey, which all the gods delight in. 7. Because the peoples, with their pleasurable offerings set forth, vie in  invoking you in many ways, bullish Indra,
ours will become the most honeyed ones for you—these pressings here.  Delight in them.
## 08
I will proclaim your previous heroic deeds, proclaim now those first  performed.

You, of real battle fervor, made the stone give way; you made the cow  easy to find, for the sacred formulation.
## 09
Sit down, Lord of Throngs, amid the throngs. They call you the most  inspired of the wise poets.
Without you, at a distance from you, nothing whatever is accomplished.  Chant a great brilliant chant, bounteous one.
## 10
By watching over us, who are in need, bounteous one, become a
comrade to your comrades, o lord of goods.
Do battle, you battle-doer [/make joy, you joy-maker] whose impetuous  powers are real. Give us a portion of wealth, even in what is (as yet)  unapportioned.