+++
title = "113"

+++
113 (939) Indra
Śataprabhedana Vairūpa
10 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 10
Indra’s great deeds, especially the smiting of Vr̥tra (vss. 2–3, 6–8), are once again  the subject of this hymn, but the emphasis is on the other gods who contributed to  the success of Indra’s exploits: Heaven and Earth (vs. 1), Viṣṇu (vs. 2), Mitra and  Varuṇa (vs. 5), and especially the Maruts (vss. 2–3, 6). In depicting these various  partnerships between Indra and various gods, the poet is establishing the model  for a similar relationship between Indra and the present poets and sacrificers. In  verse 8 he attributes to “all the gods” the ritual strengthening of Indra by means of  praise poetry and soma—an exact parallel to mortals’ standard activity on behalf  of Indra. In the first half of verse 9 in rather labored language he then addresses  his fellow priest-poets, urging them to spell out to Indra their mutual acts of  partnership—and providing in the second half of the verse a mythic example of  Indra’s aid to a mortal in return for hospitality. (Dabhīti’s hospitality to Indra and  Indra’s requital of it by rendering Dabhīti’s enemies Dhuni and Cumuri powerless  are recounted elsewhere; see, e.g., VI.20.13 and VI.26.6.) Finally in verse 10 he  addresses Indra directly, requesting goods from him. Interestingly, it seems that  the poet is not asking for these goods for himself, but presumably for his patron,  so that the patron in turn will consider the poet a successful wordsmith and reward  him appropriately.
## 1
Heaven and Earth, of one mind with all the gods, assisted his
impetuous force.
Creating his own greatness and Indrian power as he went, upon drinking  the soma the resolute one increased.
## 2
Viṣṇu with his strength (assisted) his [=Indra’s] greatness, having run to  the plant [=soma]. It teems with honey.
Upon smiting Vr̥tra with the gods [=Maruts] as fellow travelers,
bounteous Indra became worthy to be chosen. 3. When, bearing weapons, you stood with Vr̥tra the serpent, for battle, to  acquire a laud,
all the Maruts together in person there increased your greatness and  Indrian power, strong one.
## 4
On just being born, he thrust aside the challengers. The hero looked  forward to his masculine power, to battle.
He split the stone; he discharged the flowing streams downward. He  propped the broad firmament with his skillful work.
## 5
Thereupon Indra was entirely master of his powers. He thrust apart  more widely heaven and earth.
Emboldened [/bristling with excitement], he brought down the metal  mace, agreeable to Mitra and to pious Varuṇa.
## 6
The teeming ones [=Maruts] hastened there for the powers of Indra, for  the battle fury of the mettlesome one,
when the strong one split apart Vr̥tra with strength—Vr̥tra, who was  holding the waters but was himself enclosed by darkness.
## 7
The two who together approached the heroic deeds first to be
performed, taking their (battle) places with their great powers—
smoky darkness dusted down on (the one), when he was smashed.
Indra by his greatness became lord over the early invocation.
## 8
All the gods then increased your bullish powers with eloquence
accompanied by soma.
He ate the serpent Vr̥tra subdued by Indra’s blow, as fire does dry food  with his jaws.
## 9
With skillful words accompanied by chants, by reason of your (acts of)  comradeship (for him), proclaim the many (acts of) comradeship (for us). Indra is famed as subjugating Dhuni and Cumuri for Dabhīti by reason  of his [=Dabhīti’s] mind of trust (in ritual hospitality).
## 10
You—bring hither many (gifts of) good horses, because of which I shall  be considered one who pronounces efficacious enigmas.
Along ways easy to travel may we traverse all difficult passages. Find a  ford for us today in wideness.