+++
title = "114"

+++
114 (940)
All Gods
Sadhri Vairūpa or Gharma Tāpasa
10 verses: triṣṭubh, except jagatī 4
A mystical treatment of the sacrifice, whose mysteries unfortunately remain for the  most part unsolved, despite many attempts to identify the referents and relation ships of the striking images presented. We will not here add another, most likely  doomed, experiment in exegesis, although some possible referents are inserted in  brackets below. What is clear is that the elements in the ritual and elements in the

cosmic world are identified with each other (in the style of the bandhus, or mysti cal identifications, so characteristic of middle Vedic literature), but by way of a  mediating esoteric image that can apply to both (at least to “those who know”).  This style is especially evident in the first verses of the hymn, while numerology  comes more and more to dominate the later verses. Indeed, significant numbers are  found from the very beginning (the two heats of vs. 1, the three dissolutions of vs.  2, the four braids and two eagles of vs. 3), but the manipulation of numbers begins  in earnest with verses 4–5. These same two verses contrast the poet with his “simple  mind,” who sees only one entity (vs. 4), with the inspired ones and sage poets (vs.  5), who use their words to make that single entity manifold. Even though many of  the details of this enigmatic hymn remain obscure, we can see in this contrast the  inherent message of the hymn, that insight and its verbal product, poetry, have the  power to give shape and multiplicity to the perceptible world.
## 01
The two contiguous heat (sources) [=fire and sun/gharma pots/or chant  and melody] have pervaded the threefold (world) [/Trivr̥t Stoma].
Mātariśvan has come to enjoyment of the two.
Seeking to acquire the milk of heaven, they have toiled: the gods know  the chant provided with melody.
## 02
Three (Goddesses of?) Dissolution reverently approach to be pointed  out, for the conveyors (of songs?) who hear from afar recognize them. The sage poets discern the connection of those (goddesses), (although  they dwell) among the distant hidden commandments.
## 03
The well-ornamented, ghee-faced young woman with four braids [=vedi  (“altar”)/night sky?] clothes herself in the (ritual) patterns.
Two bullish eagles have settled down on her, where the gods have
acquired their share.
## 04
The eagle is (really just) one—it has entered the sea; it surveys all this  creation.
With my simple mind I saw it nearby: the mother licks it, and it licks the  mother.
## 05
The inspired ones, the sage poets configure the eagle, though it is just  one, in many ways with their words.
And arranging their meters at the ceremonies, they measure twelve
cupfuls of soma.
## 06
Configuring the four as thirty-six and arranging the meters up to twelve  (syllables?),
having measured out the sacrifice with their inspired thought, the poets make  the chariot [=sacrifice] roll forth with r̥c and sāman [/verse and tune].
## 07
Fourteen are the other powers of this one [=chariot of the sacrifice].  Seven wise ones [=priests] lead it forth with their speech.
The opulent ford—who will here proclaim it: the path by which they take  the first drink of the soma? 8. Thousandfold are the fifteen ukthas. As great as heaven and earth, so  great is that.
Thousandfold are the thousand powers. As far as the sacred
formulation is spread out, so far is speech.
## 09
Who is the wise one who knows the yoking of the meters? Who has  undertaken the holy speech?
What champion do they call the eighth of the priests? Who indeed has  discerned the two fallow bays of Indra?
## 10
Such ones circle around the end of the earth, (while) they have stayed  yoked to the poles of the chariot.
They [=gods?] distribute the legacy of their labor to them, when Yama  becomes established in his secure habitation.