+++
title = "115"

+++
115 (941) Agni
Upastuta Vārṣṭihavya
9 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 8, śakvarī 9
This hymn mixes dense and syntactically contorted descriptions of Agni in his nat ural and ritual aspects with simple declarations of praise of the same god, such that  the hymn gives the impression of ending several different times. For example, verse  5 appears to fit the type of a hymn-ending summary verse, calling on the god for  aid, but it interrupts the two most complex verses (vss. 4, 6) characterizing Agni as  fire, which appear to belong together, however unclear some of the details are. The  last three verses of the hymn (7–9), each in a different meter, provide three alterna tive endings to the hymn, each with overt signals of a final summary verse: verse 7  (in the same meter as the first six verses) evā́...stave “thus he is praised”; verse 8 ...  íti tvā ... vandate ... vā́k “so does the speech extol you”; and verse 9 íti tvā ...avocan “so have they proclaimed you.” It is difficult to know what to do with this overabun dance of finales.
The descriptive verses (1–4, 6) repay attention, with bold images and multiple  puns (e.g., druṣád in verse 3, literally “wood-sitting,” which is equally applicable  to Agni sitting on firewood and to the two associated similes: a bird sitting in  a tree and the soma-drop sitting in the wooden cup). As noted above, verses 4  and 6 are especially complex, and they have been variously interpreted. In our  view these two verses concern Agni and his flames. In verse 4 he is surrounded  by his flames, cleverly compared both to the very active winds and to immovable  mountains, and they urge him, here identified, as sometimes elsewhere, as Trita,  to mount an expedition. But in verse 6 his own flame concedes to his superior  power, even as he seeks food in inhospitable places. But other interpretations are  certainly possible.1584 X.115
## 1
Brilliant is the waxing of the tender babe, though he does not approach  his two mothers to suck.
When the udderless one has begotten him, even then has he waxed  strong in an instant, undertaking a great mission.
## 2
He has been established in the house, as “Agni” by name, as the  best workman, who wrests together the (pieces of) wood with his  gnawing tooth,
with his grinding tongue—he of good ceremony, snorting like a powerful  bull in a pasture.
## 3
Him (I invoke) for you—the god sitting on the wood like a bird in a tree,  (like) the drop from the stalk in the wooden cup, snorting, shaving  (the ground), undulating,
the conveyor (of the oblations) with his mouth like a draft-horse,  abundant with flame, like someone with a great commandment racing  along the ways.
## 4
O unaging one, you whose (flames), as you spread out eager to burn, like  winds, (like) immovable (mountains), encircle (you)—
battle-lusty they reach Trita [=Agni] like combatants a consummate  warrior, commanding him to seek.
## 5
Just this Agni, best of the Kaṇvas, comrade of the Kaṇvas, overcomer of  the distant stranger and the one close by—
let Agni protect the singers, Agni the patrons; let Agni give us  their help.
## 6
O you of good ancestry, to the best prizewinner, the mightier one, to  Jātavedas (does) the (flame?) stirring thirstily con(cede),
to him who acts boldly when he is by choice even in a waterless place, to  the greatest one, the one who seeks greedily for food even through a  wasteland.
## 7
Thus is Agni praised along with the mortal patrons as the good one, the  spirited (son) of strength by men—
(the patrons) who, well-installed like allies, truth-seeking, like the  heavens with their heavenly brilliance surmount the (other)
descendants of Manu.
## 8
“O child of nourishment, mighty one”—so does the bullish speech of  Upastuta extol you.
We shall praise you—we who are rich in heroes because of you,  establishing a longer lifetime further for ourselves.
## 9
So have the sons of Vr̥ṣṭihavya, the Upastutas, seers, proclaimed you,  o Agni.
Protect them—both singers and patrons. Saying “Vaṣaṭ, vaṣaṭ,”
(standing) upright they have reached (you); saying “Homage,
homage,” (standing) upright they have reached (you).