+++
title = "116"

+++
116 (942) Indra
Agniyuta (or Agniyūpa) Sthaura
9 verses: triṣṭubh
A fairly straightforward hymn that remains focused on its insistent themes: the  invitation to Indra to drink the soma, and the expectations we have of him after  he has done so. The first four verses issue the invitation; verses 5–6 ask Indra to  use the strength imparted by our soma to defeat our enemies, while the invita
tion is reiterated in verses 7–8. The hymn proceeds in part by verses paired in  theme and language, though verses 3–4 do not show the repetitions and patterned  variation in the other three pairs. The final verse (9) summarizes the poet’s work  while ending with a striking image of the gods as dice, giving (and presumably also  withholding) luck.
## 1
Drink the soma for great Indrian strength. Drink for Vr̥tra-smashing,  most powerful one.
Drink for wealth and for power while you are being called. Drink of the  honey; drench yourself in it, to satiety, o Indra.
## 2
Drink of this pressed soma, presented along with the (sacrificial)  animals, according to your wish, Indra.
Giving well-being, bring yourself to exhilaration in your mind, being  inclined our way for our rich good fortune.
## 3
Let the heavenly soma exhilarate you, Indra; let what is pressed among  earth-dwellers exhilarate you.
Let that exhilarate you by which you made wide space; let that exhilarate  you by which you melt down your rivals.
## 4
Doubly lofty, undiminishing, let Indra the bull drive here with his two  fallow bays to the stalk that is poured around.
As smasher of the non-luminous, (smashing) the hammer utterly, drench  yourself in the honey, pressed on the cow(hide) and brought forth.
## 5
Blunt the sharpened points, slacken the taut (bowstrings) of those incited  by sorcerers.
I give power and strength to you who are mighty. Confronting your
rivals, hew them down amid the contesting voices.
## 6
Loosen the fame of the stranger, Indra, and his might and hostilities like  the taut (strings) of a bow.
Turning toward us, having grown strong in your powers, unblunted,
make your body strong.
## 7
This oblation is given to you, bounteous one. Accept it, being without  anger, o universal king.
It is pressed for you, bounteous one, and cooked for you: eat and drink  of it when it is presented, Indra.

## 8
Eat just these oblations presented here, Indra. Take your delight in the  cooked foods and the soma.
Bringing the pleasing offerings, we enjoy you. Let the desires of the
sacrificer come true.
## 9
I send forth my eloquent speech to Indra and to Agni; like a boat upon a  river I sent it forth with my chants.
Like dice, the gods whirl around—they who give the stakes to us and get  the lucky break.