+++
title = "117"

+++
117 (943) Praise of Generosity [dhanānnadānaprasaḿ ̣sā]
Bhikṣu Āṅgirasa
9 verses: triṣṭubh, except jagatī 1–2
Unusual in both subject matter and tone. This hymn has no divine dedicand, but in  the Anukramaṇī is termed a “praise of the gift of wealth and food.” There is, in fact,  almost no mention of divinities or divine powers in the hymn, an almost unique situ ation in the R̥gveda; the gods figure only in the first verse and there only obliquely.  The emphasis is instead on the mutual relations between humans (comradeship; see,  esp., vss. 3–4, 6) and the obligation of the fortunate to provide for those in need.  Insofar as the R̥gveda treats the ethical responsibilities of men, ethical behavior is  ordinarily mediated through the gods, especially Mitra and Varuṇa, but here there  is no such mediation: the admonitions to behave properly to one’s fellow men are  direct and no gods are represented as observing and judging human behavior.
The argument for generosity is twofold and is couched not in purely ethical  terms, but in terms of self-interest. On the one hand, giving does not do the giver  any harm, as his stores do not become depleted. This sentiment is expressed most  clearly in verse 1c, but it seems also to underlie the maxim-like verses 7 and 8. Verse  7 seems to be a version of the slightly vulgar English expression “use it or lose it,”  while verse 8 suggests that sheer quantity isn’t the measure of power and effective
ness: the more “feet” an entity has, the less its autonomy and power. On the other  hand, not giving does the ungenerous man actual harm. In part, the harm is simply  the isolation produced by not acting in a comradely manner. As verse 6 says suc cinctly, “who eats alone has only evil.” But it is also the case that one’s fortunes can  change (see esp. vs. 5). Those who are rich and well fed today may find themselves  in need in the future, and it is best to forge comradely ties by giving now, in case the  situations of giver and receiver are reversed.
The tone of the hymn is colloquial and conversational. A  number of verses  deploy what appear to be old sayings or popular adages, distilled folk wisdom,  whose pertinence to the topic at hand is indirect and requires some figuring out.  Because of their rarity in the high-register texts of early Vedic, such expressions are  very precious, though they can be hard to penetrate. The Anukramaṇī identifies the poet as Bhikṣu (“beggar”) Āṅgirasa, a name pre sumably suggested after the fact by the subject matter, especially since the word  bhikṣu, though very common and culturally important in later times, does not occur  in the R̥gveda or indeed any Vedic text that we know of.
## 1
Truly the gods did not give hunger as the only deadly weapon, and the  forms of death do come upon him who is well fed.
Moreover, the wealth of one who gives does not become exhausted, and  the non-giver finds no one to show mercy.
## 2
Whoever—when a man, weak and broken, has approached desiring  nourishment—though he has food,
hardens his heart, though he always used to be his friend, he also finds  no one to show mercy.
## 3
Just he is a benefactor who gives to the beggar who, emaciated, goes  roaming, desirous of food.
He becomes sufficient for him at his pleading entreaty, and he makes him  his companion in the future.
## 4
He is no companion who does not give of his food to a companion, who,  being in his company, accompanies him.
He should turn away from him; this is not a home. He should seek
another who gives, even a stranger.
## 5
The stronger man should give to one in need. He should look along the  longer path,
for riches turn like chariot-wheels: they come up to one man after
another.
## 6
The undiscerning man finds food in vain. I speak the truth: it is just a  deadly weapon for him.
He does not prosper in compatriot, nor in companion. Who eats alone  has only evil.
## 7
It’s just when it plows that a plowshare makes a man well fed. It’s just  when he goes that a man “wraps up” the road with his feet.
The formulator who speaks is more a winner than the one who doesn’t; a  friend who gives would be superior to one who doesn’t.
## 8
The one-footed [=sun?] has stridden farther than the two-footed
[=man?]; the two-footed overtakes the three-footed [=old man?] from  behind.
The four-footed [=dog?] comes at the call of the two-footed ones as it  watches over the fivefold ones [=herds?], staying by them.
## 9
Two hands, even though the same, do not accomplish the same. Even two  (cows) with the same mother do not yield the same milk.
The heroic deeds even of twins are not the same. Two men, even though  they are kin, do not give the same.
