+++
title = "118"

+++
118 (944)
Agni Raksohan ̣
Urukṣaya Āmahīyava
9 verses: gāyatrī
Although the Anukramaṇī assigns the hymn to Agni Rakṣohan “Demon-Smiter,”  this aspect of the god is very muted in the hymn—found only in verses 1, 7–8 and  rather tamely even there. The exuberantly and ingeniously violent punishments  envisaged in the other Rakṣohan hymn in X (X.87) are entirely absent. Instead the  dominant picture is of a peaceful sacrificial hearth in which the fire responds happily  to the attentions, and especially the butter oblations, of his worshipers. Stylistically  the hymn is characterized by chaining: the repetition of a word or phrase from one  verse in the next, with a different word or phrase from that verse repeated in the  following one.
## 01
O Agni, you strike down the devourer as you shine here among
mortals
in your own dwelling place, o you of blazing commandment.
## 02
You stand up when you are well bepoured. You rejoice in response to  the ghee,
when the ladles have converged on you.
## 03
When bepoured, he shines widely. Agni is to be reverently invoked with  a hymn;
his face is anointed with the ladle.
## 04
Honey-faced Agni, when bepoured, is fully anointed with ghee,
bringing radiant goods as he shines.
## 05
Awakening, you become fully kindled, o you who carry the oblations to  the gods;
upon you do mortals call.
## 06
O mortals, serve immortal Agni with ghee,
the undeceivable lord of the household.
## 07
With undeceivable flame, o Agni, burn demonic power.
Shine as the herdsman of truth.
## 08
With your face, o Agni, flame against the sorceresses,
as you shine among those dwelling far and wide [/the Urukṣayas].
## 09
With their hymns those dwelling far and wide [/the Urukṣayas] have fully  kindled you, the oblation-carrier,
the best sacrificer among the people descended from Manu.