+++
title = "120"

+++
120 (946)
Indra
Brhaddiva ̥ Ātharvaṇa
9 verses: triṣṭubh
For most of its length this hymn is a fairly straightforward praise of Indra, his pow ers, and his victories. There is special emphasis also on the relation between Indra  and his verbally active “helpers.” The relationship is hierarchal—Indra is supreme— but also reciprocal, in that the helpers cheer him on and fortify him for his exploits  (esp. vss. 1–4). The helpers are not named; the two most prominent Indra myths,  Vr̥tra and Vala, both feature a troop aiding or encouraging Indra: the Maruts and the  Aṅgirases respectively. It is thus possible that either or both groups are meant here,  and, further, that human poets are assimilated to these divine choruses (see vs. 4). The encouragement becomes more personal in verse 5, where a 1st-person  speaker assumes the role of verbal inciter. This is surely the poet himself, but, we  will claim, not a mere human poet. The last two verses of the hymn (8–9) summa rize the performance context of the hymn. Verse 8 begins “Br̥haddiva speaks these  sacred formulations to Indra,” and Br̥haddiva is named again as the poet in verse 9  (as well as being so identified by the Anukramaṇī). But verse 9 introduces a puzzle  or a surprise, for it begins, “In this way Br̥haddiva addressed his own self—that is,  Indra.” It is difficult to read the sentence in any other way, though many have tried,  but if Indra is the same as Br̥haddiva, who is Br̥haddiva?
A way to a solution to this conundrum has been presented by Hanns-Peter  Schmidt, though he himself does not discuss this hymn. As Schmidt convincingly  argues (1968), Br̥haspati was originally an epithet and aspect of Indra, especially  in the Vala myth, in which Indra uses not brute strength but verbal skill to open  the Vala cave and release the stolen cows. Br̥haspati becomes detached from Indra  and treated as a separate god, but this process is a protracted one and can be  observed happening in the R̥gveda. We suggest that this hymn reflects an awareness  of their original identity and their growing separateness, with the verbally adroit  Br̥haspati, master of sacred formulations (bráhman; see vss. 5d and 8a), praising  his other self, the king and victorious warrior Indra. The name Br̥haddiva (lit.,  “possessing lofty heaven”) is reminiscent of Br̥haspati, and the sacred formula tions he addresses to Indra in verse 8 precisely concern the Vala myth, the locus of  their identification.
## 1
Just this was the foremost among living beings, from which the mighty  one of vibrant manly spirit was born.
As soon as he is born, he melts down his rivals, while all his helpers cheer  him on.
## 2
Having grown strong through his swelling power, he of much might, as  rival to the Dāsa, creates terror for him.
On your winning the animate and the inanimate, (your helpers) bellow to  you together at the presentation (of the soma), at the revels.
## 3
All bend their will toward you, even when these helpers are twice or three  times as many.
“Send the sweeter than sweet surging together with the sweet. With
honey, battle for that honey yonder.”
## 4
For it is even in those words that at every revel the inspired poets cheer  you on as you win the stakes.
Stretch your mightier (bow) taut, bold one. Let the sorcerers of evil ways  not deceive you.
## 5
Through you we have become exultant in our battles, as we see before us  the many fights to be fought.
I rouse your weapons with my words; I hone your vital powers with my  sacred formulation.

## 6
(I praise) him who is worthy of praise, the craftsman possessing many  forms, the strongest Āptya of Āptyas.
He will shatter the seven Dānus with his swelling strength; he will
overcome the many opposing forces.
## 7
You deposited this, both the nearer and the farther, in the house in which  you helped with your help.
You cause the two parents [=Heaven and Earth], who were in motion, to  stay still, and then you spur on many deeds.
## 8
Br̥haddiva speaks these sacred formulations fortissimo to Indra: “the first  to win the sun,
he has dominion over the great cowpen of the sovereign king, and he  opened up all the doors that are his own.”
## 9
In this way, great Br̥haddiva, the Atharvan, addressed his own self—that  is, Indra.
The stainless sisters, who stay by their mother, speed him with swelling  strength and make him strong.