+++
title = "121"

+++
121 (947)
Ka “Who?”
Hiraṇyagarbha Prājāpatya
10 verses: triṣṭubh
This hymn takes the form of a cosmogony, but here the creative principle is  unnamed or has no name. Rather than declaring its deity, the hymn’s refrain is  a question: “Who is the god to whom we should do homage with our oblation?”  Although without a name, the deity has a form. In the first verse the poet calls it  hiraṇyagarbhá “the golden embryo” (vs. 1a), the yolk of an egg (cf. Lommel 1939),  thus anticipating later myths of creation from a world-egg (e.g., Vāmana Purāṇa  Saromāhātmya XXII.17). But the “golden embryo” is also the sun, which here is  born as the center of the cosmos. Toward the end of the hymn, in verse 7, the poet  gives the still unnamed principle a second identity not just as a god but as “the  life of the gods” (devā́nām...ásuḥ). The last verse finally attaches a name to the  unnamed principle, but this verse is a later addition (Oldenberg 1888: 248), reflect ing a redactional effort not to leave the mystery of this principle unresolved. In  that verse the deity is revealed to be Prajāpati, the “Lord of Creatures,” who in  the Brāhmaṇas is both the creator god and the archetype of the sacrifice. Later  tradition confirms the identity of this principle by understanding the constantly  repeated ká “who?” to be a name of Prajāpati. Accordingly the Anukramaṇī desig nates Ka as the deity of this hymn.
In a very perceptive interpretation of the hymn Proferes (2007: 140–41) shows the  relation of this hymn to the ideology of kingship. In the royal unction ritual the king  is reborn by means of the unction waters as a being with the power and brilliance of  the sun. This hymn reproduces the elements of that rite: the conception of an embryo (vss. 1, 7) and a ruler (vss. 1, 2, 3), the waters (vss. 7, 8, 9) that bear an embryo (vs. 7),  and the birth of fire (vs. 7). The unnamed principle encompasses the entire world (vss.  4, 5, 10), and its power extends in every direction (vs. 4) and over every being (vss. 2,  3, 8), as the king (ideally) is the master of the world, whose power extends everywhere.  Likewise, the unnamed principle supports the world—making it firm (vs. 5) and steady  (vss. 5, 6)—and gives it life (vss. 2, 7), as the king maintains and preserves the world.
Structurally, the hymn is organized as an almost unbroken series of dependent  clauses. The first series of relative clauses, hanging off the main clauses in verse 1,  lasts from verses 2 through 6. Verse 7 then re-establishes the pattern, for it has a  main clause, on which the relative clauses in verse 8 depend. The phrase “he alone  existed” in verses 1b and 8c create a ring, which defines the boundaries of the main  body of the hymn. Outside this ring and outside the main body of the hymn, verse  9 repeats in miniature the pattern of preceding verses. It has a main clause in 9a,  which is followed by three more relative clauses and concluded by the refrain. The  verse is an appeal to the unnamed deity to do no harm, making it also thematically  distinct from the main body of the hymn. Like verse 10, it too may have been a later  addition, as Thieme (1964: 69) has asserted.
## 01
The golden embryo evolved in the beginning. Born the lord of what came  to be, he alone existed.
He supports the earth and the heaven here— – Who is the god to whom  we should do homage with our oblation?
## 02
Who is the giver of breath, the giver of strength; whose command all  honor, whose command the gods honor;
whose shadow is immortality, whose shadow is death— – Who is the god  to whom we should do homage with our oblation?
## 03
Who became king of the breathing, blinking, moving world—just he  alone by his greatness;
who is lord of the two-footed and four-footed creatures here— – Who is  the god to whom we should do homage with our oblation?
## 04
Whose are these snow-covered mountains [=the Himalayas] in their  greatness; whose is the sea together with the world-stream, they say;
whose are these directions, whose (their) two arms [=the zenith and
nadir?]— – Who is the god to whom we should do homage with our  oblation?
## 05
By whom the mighty heaven and earth were made firm; by whom the sun  was steadied, by whom the firmament;
who was the one measuring out the airy realm in the midspace— – Who  is the god to whom we should do homage with our oblation?
## 06
Toward whom the two battle lines [=heaven and earth] looked, steadied  with his help, though trembling in mind,
(those) upon which the risen sun radiates. – Who is the god to whom we  should do homage with our oblation?1594 X.122
## 07
When the lofty waters came, receiving everything as an embryo and  giving birth to the fire,
then the life of the gods evolved alone— – Who is the god to whom we  should do homage with our oblation?
## 08
Who by his greatness surveyed the waters receiving (ritual) skill (as an  embryo) and giving birth to the sacrifice;
who, the god over gods, alone existed. – Who is the god to whom we  should do homage with our oblation?
## 09
Let him not do us harm—he who is the progenitor of earth or who,  with foundations that are real, engendered heaven,
and who engendered the gleaming, lofty waters. – Who is the god to
whom we should do homage with our oblation?
## 10
O Prajāpati! No one other than you has encompassed all these things  that have been born.
Let what we desire as we make oblation to you be ours. We would be  lords of riches.