+++
title = "122"

+++
122 (948)
Agni
Citramahas Vāsiṣṭha
8 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 1, 5
Attributed to a Vasiṣṭhid by the Anukramaṇī, this hymn ends (vs. 8) with a men tion of the Vasiṣṭhas and with the Vasiṣṭha refrain from Maṇḍala VII. It is a fairly  standard praise of Agni, deploying a wide range of his standard epithets and ritual  roles and titles. The ritual is the complete focus of the hymn, and the rewards that  the sacrificer will receive from properly performing it and serving Agni are also at  the forefront. There is much recycling of vocabulary.
## 01
Him, of brilliant might like a Vasu, will I hymn—the precious, kindly  guest, not to be despised.
He will bestow all-nourishing riches—Agni the Hotar, the Houselord— and an abundance of heroes.
## 02
Taking pleasure, Agni, delight in my speech, knowing all the (ritual)  patterns, o very effective one.
You with your cloak of ghee—set the course for the sacred formulation.  Following your commandment the gods begot (it).
## 03
As you, the immortal, circle the seven domains, as you do pious work for  the pious, be generous to the one who performs (rituals) well
with wealth rich in heroes ready to hand, o Agni. Whoever has reached  toward you with a kindling stick, take pleasure in him. 4. The beacon of the sacrifice, the foremost one set in front do the seven  (priests) offering oblations reverently invoke as prizewinner—
Agni who hears them, the bull with ghee on his back, the god who gives  to the giver an abundance of heroes.
## 05
You are the foremost messenger, worthy to be chosen. Being summoned  for immortal (soma?), become exhilarated (on it).
You did the Maruts groom in the house of the pious; you did the Bhr̥gus  illuminate with praises.
## 06
In milking all-nourishing refreshment out of the good milker for the  sacrificer who is pleasing to the sacrifice, o very effective one,
and in making the circuit three times around the truths, around the
sacrifice, while shining ghee-backed, o Agni, you well display your
effective power.
## 07
Just to you, at the brightenings of this dawn, did the sons of Manu  perform sacrifice, on making you their messenger.
You have the gods strengthened to be magnified, rubbing melted butter  down (on your body) at the ceremony, o Agni.
## 08
The Vasiṣṭhas have called you down, the prizewinner, as they hymn you,  o Agni—the ritual adepts at the rites.
Uphold among the sacrificers the thriving of wealth. – Do you protect us  always with your blessings.