+++
title = "123"

+++
123 (949)
Vena
Vena Bhārgava
8 verses: triṣṭubh
A famous and mystical hymn, whose opacity still defies complete comprehension  although its main features are clear. The subject is announced in the first words of  the first verse: “this Seeker” (ayám vénaḥ), and the Anukramaṇī also attributes the  hymn to the same figure, or his multiform: Vena Bhārgava. This poet is also cred
ited with the soma hymn IX.85 by the Anukramaṇī, and the last four verses of that  hymn (9–12), which contain phraseology quite similar to X.123 and which we might  term “Vena without Tears,” help clarify X.123. What is at issue is the common iden tification of Soma and the Sun, united in the Seeker figure, who is also identified as  a Gandharva (vss. 4 and 7) and as a bird (vss. 5–6). Most verses are applicable to  either Soma or the Sun, and, as is common in hymns with such dual referents, the  effort of fashioning phraseology that works for both referents accounts for many  of the enigmas in the hymn, beginning with the birth and first appearance of the  Seeker in verses 1–2.
It is noteworthy that the Seeker is also eagerly sought: the inspired poets pursue  him (vss. 1, 4, probably 6), as do women seeking a husband (vs. 2) and mothers (vs.

3)—both feminine references probably standing for the hymns produced by these  poets. Needless to say, both Soma and the Sun are regularly the object of such  poetic attentions, and the intimate bond between poets and what they celebrate is a  prominent theme in the hymn.
Less prominent, but perhaps not less important, is the theme of name-and-form.  This first surfaces explicitly in verse 4, where it is their recognition of the form of  the Seeker that inspires the poets’ longing for him. In the same verse the Seeker, as  Gandharva, finds “the immortal names.” Later, in verse 7, this same Gandharva  engenders his own names. These verses seem to adumbrate the later preoccupation  with name and form as representing the creation of the multiplicity of objects in the  world by the division of the formless into “forms” and the assignment of “names” to  each in order to differentiate them. This theme is treated with great skill and subtlety  also in III.38. In this hymn here the Gandharva’s engendering his own names in the  penultimate verse of the hymn leads to a climax of sorts in the final verse (8), though  one that is quite downplayed. In that final verse the undifferentiated figure of Soma/ Sun is actually divided into its two constituent parts, though neither is mentioned by  name. The first half of the verse concerns the drop (drapsá), a word regularly used of  Soma, while the second half has as its subject bhānú “radiance,” which is especially  characteristic of the Sun. Through the power of the poets’ perception of the true  “form” of things and their ability to assign them “names,” Sun and Soma emerge at  the end of the hymn as separate, though mutually dependent, entities.
## 1
This Seeker here spurs on those females whose embryo is the dappled  one—he whose afterbirth is light—in the measuring out of the
airy realm.
At the union of the waters and the sun, the inspired poets lick him with  their thoughts like an infant (calf).
## 2
The Seeker raises up a wave from the sea. The cloud-born one, the top of  the delightful one has been sighted,
as the glint on the back of truth, on its upper surface. (All) the
“brides-to-be” have roared toward the same womb.
## 3
The mothers of the calf, who are many though stemming from the same  nest, stand there bellowing [/yearning] toward the same (womb).
Having stridden onto the back of truth, the voices lick at the
immortal honey.
## 4
Recognizing his form, the inspired poets longed (for him). Because they  came toward the cry of the wild buffalo,
approaching with truth they mounted onto the stream. The Gandharva  found the immortal names.
## 5
The Apsaras, the maiden smiling coyly at her lover, bears him in the  highest distant heaven.
He roamed among the wombs of the dear one [masc.], himself being  dear; he sat on a golden wing—he is the Seeker— 6. When they, seeking with their heart, gazed upon you, an eagle flying to  the vault,
the golden-winged messenger of Varuṇa, the (omen-)bird fluttering in  the womb of Yama.
## 7
The Gandharva stood erect upon the vault, facing outward, bearing his  dazzling weapons;
wearing a fragrant cloak, (lovely) to be seen like the sun, he engendered  his own dear names.
## 8
When the (soma-)drop goes to the sea, seeing with the eye of a vulture in  the spreading expanse,
the (sun’s) radiance with its bright blaze, finding pleasure (in it [=drop]),  has created its own dear (names) in the third realm.