+++
title = "126"

+++
126 (952) All Gods
Kulmalabarhiṣa Śailūṣi or Aṃhomuc Vāmadevya
8 verses: upariṣṭādbr̥hatī, except triṣṭubh 8
A simple hymn whose contents are shaped in great part by its meter. The first seven  verses are in upariṣṭādbr̥hatī, technically 8 8 8 12. But the last four syllables of the  final pāda are a refrain, “beyond hatreds” (áti dvíṣaḥ), giving the impression of an  anuṣṭubh verse (8 8 8 8) with a decorative flourish at the end. The principal dedi
cands of the hymn are the Ādityas, or rather the trio Varuṇa, Mitra, and Aryaman.  These appear in scrambled order in verse 1cd, but for the rest of the upariṣṭādbr̥hatī verses (2–7) occupy the entire second pāda in fixed order. This punctuation of each  verse with two fixed phrases, each at the end of its hemistich, subordinates the mes sage of each verse to its structure. Fortunately the message is elementary: the gods
in question should lead us out of difficulties and to shelter and safety. A few other gods appear in the hymn: Rudra with the Maruts, and Indra and  Agni in verse 5, and Agni in the appended and metrically distinct final verse (8), but  their presence barely registers in the very Ādityan atmosphere.
## 1
O gods, neither narrow straits nor difficult passage reach that mortal whom Aryaman, Mitra, and Varuṇa lead of one accord—beyond
hatreds.
## 2
For we choose that—o Varuṇa, Mitra, Aryaman—
by which you rescue a mortal from narrow straits and lead him—beyond  hatreds.
## 3
They are here to aid us now—Varuṇa, Mitra, Aryaman—
the best leaders in leading us and the best deliverers in delivering us— beyond hatreds.
## 4
You protect everyone all around—Varuṇa, Mitra, Aryaman.
May we be in the dear shelter of you, o you of good guidance—beyond  hatreds.
## 5
The Ādityas (lead) beyond failures—Varuṇa, Mitra, Aryaman.
We would call on powerful Rudra along with the Maruts, on Indra and  Agni, for well-being—beyond hatreds. 6. They are our leaders across—Varuṇa, Mitra, Aryaman—
beyond all difficult passages—the kings of the settled domains—beyond  hatreds.
## 7
Let them extend blessing to us to aid us—Varuṇa, Mitra, Aryaman— and broad shelter—the Ādityas, when we implore them—beyond hatreds. 8. Just as then you released the buffalo-cow bound by the foot, you good  ones worthy of the sacrifice,
so release constraint from us. (Let) our lifetime be further lengthened,  o Agni.