+++
title = "127"

+++
127 (953) Night
Kuśika Saubhara or Rātri Bhāradvājī
8 verses: gāyatrī
In contrast to the numerous hymns dedicated to the lovely and welcome Dawn,  Night is barely celebrated in the R̥gveda, only in this one hymn. The night described  here is not that of the frightening and formless darkness so often mentioned in the  text, but rather starry night, who has beauties of her own. In fact, she is described  in places (see vss. 2 and 3c especially) with phraseology more appropriate to Dawn,  whose own advent is anticipated in verse 7.
## 1
Goddess Night, while coming hither, has looked about in many places  with her eyes.
She has laid on herself all beauties.
## 2
The immortal goddess has filled the broad (midspace), its depths and  heights;
with light she repels the darkness.
## 3
She has expelled her sister, Dawn—she, the goddess, while coming hither— and darkness will race away.
## 4
(Be) here for us today—you at whose journey we have settled down, like birds on their nest in the tree.
## 5
Down have settled the roving bands, down the footed, down the winged, down even the falcons in their busyness.
## 6
Keep away the she-wolf and the wolf; keep away the thief, o Night. But for us become easy to traverse.
## 7
Darkness, fully ornamented, black, smeared all over (with stars), has  approached me.
O Dawn, settle it like debts.
## 8
Right up to you have I driven (this hymn), like cows (to their pen).  Choose it, o Daughter of Heaven,
o Night—like a praise song for a victor.
