+++
title = "128"

+++
128 (954)
All Gods
Vihavya Āṅgirasa
9 verses: triṣṭubh, except jagatī 9
Anxiety about rival sacrifices, a common preoccupation of the R̥gveda, begins  and informs this hymn. The first two verses situate the performance of the hymn  “at the competing invocation(s)” (vihavá, a derivative of which provides the poet’s  name, Vihavya, in the Anukramaṇī)—a moment when sacrificers all over the Ārya  lands are inviting the same gods to their own separate sacrifices. The poet urges his  own case with a series of emphatic fronted 1st-person singular pronominal forms  (“mine,” “to me,” etc.) in the first four verses. The potential competing sacrificers in  these early verses are transformed into even more threatening figures as the hymn  progress—haters (vs. 5), violent challengers in battle (vs. 6), rivals (vs. 9). The poet  then asks for the aid of the gods in repulsing them and in protecting him.
The grammar and diction of the hymn are straightforward and spring no  surprises.
## 1
Mine be the luster at the competing invocations, o Agni. Might we thrive  in our body as we kindle you in your body.
To me let the four quarters bow. With you as our overseer might we win  battles.
## 2
Mine be all the gods at the competing invocation: the Maruts together  with Indra, Viṣṇu, and Agni.
Mine be the midspace, providing a broad place. For me, at my desire, let  the wind purify itself [=blow].
## 3
To me let the gods bring material wealth through sacrifice. In me be the  prayer; in me the invocation to the gods.
The ancient divine Hotars acted with zeal. Might we be free from harm  in our body and possessed of good heroes.
## 4
For me let them sacrifice (with) the oblations that are mine. Let the  purpose of my mind come true.
Let me not fall into any kind of offense. All you gods, speak for us!
## 5
You six broad goddesses, create broad (space) for us. All you gods, act as  heroes here.
May we not be bereft of offspring, nor of our own bodies. May we not  become subject to him who hates us, o King Soma.
## 6
O Agni, repulsing the battle fury of the others [=the enemy], as an  undeceivable herdsman, protect us on every side.
Let the challengers bearing down turn back: at home their intention will  disappear when they awaken.
## 7
He who is the Ordainer of Ordainers, the lord of creation—him, the god  Rescuer, who vanquishes hostility (do I invoke). Let both the Aśvins and Br̥haspati (protect) this sacrifice here; let the  gods protect the sacrificer from failure.
## 8
The buffalo of broad expanse will offer shelter to us at this invocation— he who is invoked by many, who provides many cattle.
Show mercy to our offspring, o you of the fallow bays. Do not harm us  nor hand us over.
## 9
Whoever are our rivals, let them keep away: with Indra and Agni we will  thrust them down.
The Vasus, Rudras, and Ādityas have made me one who touches on high,  a formidable observer, an over-king.