+++
title = "130"

+++
130 (956)
Creation of the Sacrifice
Yajña Prājāpatya
7 verses: triṣṭubh, except jagatī 1
In its first three verses the hymn depicts the creation of the acts of the sacrifice  through the image of weaving. The form of the sacrifice was instituted by the gods  (vss. 1, 3)  and first carried out by the “fathers,” the ancient seers who were the  ancestors of the current priests (vs. 6). Indeed, these fathers are at the present rite  as well (1cd). In verse 2 it becomes complicated because it is difficult to know who  the actors are. In 2ab the subject may not be “a man,” but “the Man,” a figure  similar to the Puruṣa of X.90. That is how Sāyaṇa and others have understood it.  But it might also refer simply to “a man” in the sense of “a human” and imply that  humans have taken up the weaving of the gods and ancestors, and in doing so their  activity reaches to heaven. Again in 2cd it is not clear who “they” are who have sat  down to weave the sacrifice. They might be the fathers after 1cd, the human priests  in continuation of 2ab, or the gods in anticipation of verse 3. Since any of these  could have been so described, the ambiguity may be intentional.
Verse 3ab completes the weaving image, although the terminology reflects the  ritual as much as it does weaving. The “model” and “image” could be for a woven  cloth or a ritual performance. The nidā́na, a “connection” or a “rope,” might fit  weaving but does not fit the ritual very well. Since according to X.114.2 poets are

able to see the hidden “connection,” in a ritual context it may describe knowledge  that a priest has. On the other hand “melted butter” and a “frame” could find a  place in either weaving or ritual. In 3cd the imagery is all from the sacrifice. In 3c  the poet mentions the Praügaśastra, which is the second recitation of the Morning  Pressing in the classical Agniṣṭoma. The recitation comprises I.2–3, which names  the deities who receive soma in the three pressings in an Agniṣṭoma, and may have  been singled out because of that. The last line could also be translated “when all  the gods sacrificed to the god,” but we have understood it as an echo of 6d and  X.90.16a (=I.164.50a) yajñéna yajñám ayajanta devā́ḥ “with the sacrifice the gods  offered the sacrifice.”
The ritual frame described in verses 1–3 is then filled with gods in verses 4–5,  verses that link the various meters of Vedic poetry with the major gods of the sacri ficial day. There are various associations between a particular meter and a particu lar god: The sacrificial fire, Agni, begins the sacrificial day, and the gāyatrī meter is  associated with the morning soma-pressing. The name of the br̥hatī-meter is similar  to the name of Br̥haspati, and Indra hymns are characteristically composed in the  triṣṭubh meter. And, balancing Agni and the gāyatrī, the All Gods and the jagatī meter are associated with the evening soma-pressing.
The last two verses recall the ancient sages who ordered the sacrifice and affirm  that the priests today follow the path that has been set for them. As Geldner notes,  the “courses (of the ritual)” refer to the actions of the ritual to which the recitations  are attached.
## 1
The sacrifice, which is extended in every direction by its warp threads and  stretched out by a hundred and one acts of the gods—
these fathers who have traveled here weave that. They sit at the warp,  saying, “Weave forth, weave back.”
## 2
A man extends it [=the warp] and pulls it up (with the heddles); a man  has extended it out upon the vault of heaven here.
Here are their pegs; they [=the gods?] sat down upon their seat and made  the sāman-chants the shuttles for weaving.
## 3
What was its model, its image? What its connection? What was its melted  butter? What was its frame?
What was the meter? What was the Praüga-recitation, what the hymn?— when all the gods offered the god [=the Sacrifice].
## 4
The gāyatrī meter became the yokemate of Agni. Savitar has united with  the uṣṇihā meter
and Soma with the anuṣṭubh meter, gaining greatness through the
hymns. The br̥hatī meter helped the speech of Br̥haspati.
## 5
The virāj meter is the full glory of Mitra and Varuṇa, and the triṣṭubh  meter is here Indra’s portion of the (sacrificial) day.
The jagatī meter entered the All Gods. According to this did the seers,  the sons of Manu, arrange (the ritual). 6. The seers, the sons of Manu, our fathers, arranged (the ritual) according  to this, when the sacrifice was born in ancient times.
Seeing with my mind as my eye, I think of the ancient ones who offered  this sacrifice.
## 7
The courses (of the ritual were) joined with the praise songs, joined with  the meters. The heavenly Seven Seers were joined with the model (of  the rite).
Looking along the path of the ancients, the insightful ones [=the present  priests] have taken hold of the reins (of the sacrifice) like charioteers.