+++
title = "131"

+++
131 (957) Indra (1–3, 6–7), Aśvins (4–5)
Sukīrti Kākṣīvata
7 verses: triṣṭubh, except anuṣṭubh 4
The Anukramaṇī attributes this hymn to a descendant of Kakṣīvant, the clever  wordsmith of I.116–26, and, although the poem is framed by conventional prayers  for help to Indra (vss. 1, 6–7), there is more than a flash of Kakṣīvant’s brilliance  in the intermediate verses, especially 2–3. Moreover, almost half of Kakṣīvant’s  output consists of Aśvin hymns (I.116–120), indeed, more than half by verse count,  and verses 4–5 of our hymn allude to a myth not otherwise found in the R̥gveda but  prevalent in later Vedic, in which the Aśvins figure prominently.
Verses 2 and 3 have a slightly folksy air, using homely images to provide a model  for Indra’s behavior toward us. In verse 2 the model is the harvesting and threshing  of grain; if our interpretation is correct, the poet compares the threshing of the  grain, which gets rid of the chaff and keeps only the wholesome grain, to deci
sions Indra should make about how to distribute goods he has acquired. The goods  should come only to us [=the good grain], not to those [=the chaff] who neglect  their sacrificial tasks. This image has the type of twist that Kakṣīvant enjoys: the  audience thinks at first that the grain is being compared to the “goodies” to be  distributed, and when that interpretation doesn’t work, they must dig deeper to  redistribute the metaphorical roles.
Verse 3 is not as conceptually complex, but it displays a virtuosic density. The  first pāda contains the entire metaphorical model: a one-horse vehicle won’t suc ceed, or in an expanded and more literal paraphrase, “there is nothing that, when  drawn by a single animal, has traveled in the right way.” The implications are then  worked out: pāda b suggests that relying on oneself alone will not bring fame; the  last half of the verse provides the solution: seek Indra as helper and yokemate.
This message, that everyone needs a helper, is then projected onto the mythologi cal plane, indeed onto the greatest hero—often presented as acting triumphantly  alone—Indra. The little snatch of the Aśvin story found in verses 4–5 emphasizes  how they and Sarasvatī “helped” Indra in his need. This myth has been much

discussed in the literature (see especially Bloomfield [1893] and Oldenberg [1893], as  well as Jamison [1991: 98–103]), especially in its relationship to the later Sautrāmaṇī ritual, which in fact utilizes some of the verses in this hymn and which owes its  name to the epithet of Indra found in verses 6–7, sutrā́man “of good protection.”  We will not pursue the issue in detail here. In brief summary, Indra became sick  after drinking an excess of soma, and in order to heal him the Aśvins and Sarasvatī
had him drink the usually forbidden alcohol surā, which they obtained in one way  or another (the methods are different at different periods in Vedic) from the asuric  Namuci. The surā was not pure but mixed, and both the Aśvins and Indra are here  depicted as performing the singular feat of separating the two mixed liquids in the  course of drinking them.
If even Indra occasionally needs helpers, we need feel no shame in seeking one  ourselves, and in the last two verses (6–7) we express the hope that Indra will fill  this role for us.
## 1
O overpowering Indra, thrust away all the eastern foes, away the
western ones,
away the northern ones, o champion, and away the southern ones, so  that we might rejoice in your broad shelter.
## 2
Surely it is like barley-growers and their barley—how they cut it,
threshing it according to the old ways—
(so), here, just here (with us [=grain]) put the goodies of those [=chaff]  who have not come for the reverent twisting of the sacred grass.
## 3
Because a “one-horse” carriage doesn’t drive well, so fame has never  been acquired (thus) at the encounters.
Inspired ones, seeking cows, seeking horses, seeking prizes, (seek) the  bull Indra for partnership.
## 4
O Aśvins, having separated the surā-soma by drinking it in company with  the asuric Namuci,
you helped Indra in his deeds, o lords of beauty.
## 5
Like parents their son, both the Aśvins helped (you), Indra, through  their wondrous skills and sage words.
When with your powers you separated the surā-soma by drinking it,
Sarasvatī healed you, bounteous one.
## 6
Let Indra be of good protection, of good help with his help, very  gracious, affording all possessions.
Let him thrust away hatred; let him create fearlessness. Might we be
lords of good heroes in abundance.
## 7
May we be in the favor of him who deserves the sacrifice, in his
propitious benevolence.
Let Indra of good protection, of good help to us keep hatred away even  from a distance.