+++
title = "133"

+++
133 (959) Indra
Sudās Paijavana
7 verses: śakvarī 1–3, mahāpaṅkti 4–6, triṣṭubh 7
The most salient feature of this hymn is the refrain of the first six verses, “let the  little bowstrings of the other squirts burst on their bows,” an elaboration on the  Nābhāka Kāṇva refrain of VIII.39–42 “let all the other squirts burst,” though  there is no apparent connection between the two poets. Our hymn is attributed  to Sudās Paijavana; Sudās is the name of the leading king in the Battle of the  Ten Kings, on whose side Indra fought, and it is perhaps not an accident that  the first three verses in this hymn are in a form of śakvarī meter (here seven  pādas of eight syllables). In VII.33.4 “a lofty cry in śakvarī” is what attracted  Indra to fight on the side of Sudās in this battle. It is meter that also provides  the possible connection with the Nābhāka Kāṇva hymns just mentioned: the rare  śakvarī meter is also found in VIII.40.2, and the likewise rather rare mahāpaṅkti  meter (six pādas of eight syllables) of the second three verses of our hymn (4–6)  is also the meter of the Nābhāka hymns VIII.39, VIII.40 (save for vss. 2 and 12),  and VIII.41.
The hymn celebrates the martial deeds and powers of Indra and urges the god to  use his powers against our enemies, both within and without.
## 1
Chant forth to him a leading chariot (of a hymn), a fortifying (hymn)  to Indra.
As a maker of wide space even in close quarters, a Vr̥tra-smiter in
combat and conflicts, become our inciter.
– Let the little bowstrings of the other squirts burst on their bows.
## 2
You sent the rivers surging downward; you smashed the serpent. You were born without a rival, Indra; you foster everything of value. We  embrace you.
– Let the little bowstrings of the other squirts burst on their bows.
## 3
All the hostilities of the stranger will disappear, while our poetic insights  will reach beyond (those) of the stranger.
You are wont to shoot the murderous weapon at the rival who wishes to  smite us, Indra. Your generosity—(that is just) giving goods.
– Let the little bowstrings of the other squirts burst on their bows.
## 4
Indra, the folk all about who, acting the wolf, will set their sights on us, set them beneath our feet. You are an overpowering oppressor.
– Let the little bowstrings of the other squirts burst on their bows.
## 5
Indra, whoever of the same lineage assails us and whoever outside the pale— bring his power low. (You are) like great Heaven in your own person. – Let the little bowstrings of the other squirts burst on their bows.
## 6
We, seeking you, seize hold of your companionship, Indra.
Lead us along the path of truth, across all difficult passages.
– Let the little bowstrings of the other squirts burst on their bows.
## 7
O Indra, for us exert your power over her who will milk out a choice  thing for the singer—
so that the great cow with unsplit udder will swell with milk for us, in a  thousand streams.