+++
title = "134"

+++
134 (960)
Indra
Māndhātar Yauvanāśva (1–6a), Godhā (6b–7)
7 verses: mahāpaṅkti, except paṅkti 7
Although the Anukramaṇī assigns X.133 and X.134 to different poets, they seem to  be companion pieces. The latter hymn shares its meter, mahāpaṅkti, with the second  triplet (vss. 4–6) of X.133; both hymns are dedicated to Indra and share phraseol ogy (e.g., 133.4bc and 134.2cd); and 134 also has a refrain in its first six verses,  though one without the slangy sassiness of 133.1–6.
Like the last hymn, this one asks Indra for help against our enemies and also  for bounties. These are of course standard requests, but the imagery toward the  end of the hymn (vss. 5–6) is both precise and quirky, particularly the picture of  Indra using his ability like a long crook to pull down a high branch and shake down  its fruit, an image in turn compared to a goat doing the same with his forefoot.  (Anyone familiar with goat behavior will recognize this picture instantly.)
## 01
When, Indra, you filled the two world-halves, as Dawn does,
as the great sovereign king of the great domains
did the goddess Begetter beget you, did the auspicious Begetter
beget you.

## 02
Make slack the taut (bow) of the evilly angry mortal.
Set him beneath our feet—whoever will set his sights on us.
– The goddess Begetter begat (you), the auspicious Begetter begat (you). 3. Shake down these lofty all-glittering refreshments, you foe-smiter,
through your abilities, able Indra, along with all your forms of help.
– The goddess Begetter begat (you), the auspicious Begetter begat (you). 4. Since you shake down all these, o Indra of a hundred resolves,
like wealth for the presser, together with thousandfold forms of help,
the goddess Begetter begot (you), the auspicious Begetter begot (you). 5. Like beads of sweat let the missiles fly down, scattered all around
like blades of dūrvā grass. Let malevolence go away from us.
– The goddess Begetter begat (you), the auspicious Begetter begat (you). 6. Because you carry your ability like a long crook, you rich in counsel, you will hold (it) as a goat (does) a branch with its forefoot,
bounteous one.
– The goddess Begetter begat (you), the auspicious Begetter begat (you). 7. O gods, never do we confound, never do we efface (them):
we practice obedience to your solemn utterances.
We grab onto (you) here by the sides, by the shoulders.