+++
title = "136"

+++
136 (962)
Muni [the Kesins “Long-Haired Ones”] ́
Vātaraśana’s seven sons, the munis Jūti 1, Vātajūti 2, Viprajūti 3, Vrṣḁ̄ ṇaka 4,  Karikrata 5, Etaśa 6, R̥śyaśrṅ̥ ga 7
7 verses: anuṣṭubh
This short hymn about the long-haired (keśin) ascetic (muni) has gained a certain  measure of fame as an apparent precursor of later extreme ascetic practices and  of the Rudra-Śiva cult (based especially on the mention of Rudra in the last verse,  where the ascetic drinks an apparent cultic substance in company with Rudra).  From the R̥gvedic point of view its closest analogue is the Labasūkta (X.119),  describing the sensations of a soma-drinker, with its refrain “Have I drunk of the  soma? Yes!” Both hymns depict the experience as flight, especially flight sped by the  wind (here see vss. 2–6) and affording a bird’s eye view of the earth and its inhabit ants (here vs. 4–5), and also emphasize the subject’s sense of power over cosmic  entities (here esp. vss. 1, 5).
The difference seems to be the identity of the drink that produces these sensa tions: soma in I.119, “poison” (viṣá) in this hymn. The mention of the latter sub stance begins and ends this hymn (vss. 1a, 7c) in ring composition. It is unclear what  the liquid in question is. However, it should be noted that the drinker himself/itself  is provided with characteristic somian vocabulary (“sweet, most exhilarating”) in  the last pāda (6d) before the final verse depicting the preparation and drinking of  the poison, and furthermore that the preparation of this poison by churning/stir ring (√manth) and crushing (√piṣ) seems to mimic the preparation of soma: “crush”  is semantically close to “press” (√su), and a certain type of soma, mixed with meal,  is technically called manthín. The prominence of the wind-god Vāyu (vss. 5, 7) is  also reminiscent of the soma sacrifice, for Vāyu, along with Indra, is the first recipi ent of the soma drink. Thus, the cultic practice here is either being presented as a  mirror-image analogue of the orthodox soma sacrifice, or in fact is the soma sacri fice, but in esoteric guise.
## 01
The long-haired one bears fire, the long-haired one poison, the
long-haired one the two world-halves.
The long-haired one (bears) the sun for all to see. The long-haired one is  called this light here.
## 02
The wind-girt ascetics wear tawny rags.
They follow the swooping of the wind when the gods have entered (them). 3. “Roused up to ecstasy by our asceticism, we have mounted the winds. You mortals see only our bodies.”

## 04
He flies through the midspace, gazing down on all forms.
The ascetic has been established as the comrade of every god for good  action.
## 05
The horse of the wind, the comrade of Vāyu—so sped by (that) god, the  ascetic
presides over both seas, the eastern and the western.
## 06
Ranging in the range of the Apsarases and the Gandharvas, of the  wild birds,
the long-haired one is their sweet, most exhilarating comrade, who
knows their will.
## 07
Vāyu churned it for him; Kunannamā kept crushing it,
when the long-haired one drank of the poison with his cup, together  with Rudra.