+++
title = "137"

+++
137 (963)
All Gods
Bharadvāja 1, Kaśyapa 2, Gotama 3, Atri 4, Viśvāmitra 5, Jamadagni 6, Vasiṣṭha 7 7 verses: anuṣṭubh
The Anukramaṇī attributes these seven verses to seven different authors, and it is a  distinguished group of poets indeed: the same foundational r̥ṣis in the same order as  in IX.67, a hymn that seems intended to bring together the separate poetic lineages  into a unified pan-Ārya assemblage for political purposes.
It is difficult to discern such a grand design in this hymn, which, moreover, shows  no signs of composite nature. Six of the seven verses (all but vs. 6) are found together in  single hymns in both the Śaunaka and the Paippalāda recensions of the Atharvaveda  (IV.13 and V.18 respectively), and the contents form a unity. Not surprisingly, given  its Atharvaveda parallels, it is a simple Atharvan healing spell, calling on the gods, the  wind, and the waters to bring a remedy for the disease afflicting the object of the spell.  The poet-officiant is the actual effector of the healing, however, and in the last verse  of the hymn (7; see also vs. 4) he deploys both his hands and his voice to bring about  the cure—the usual pairing of action and speech characteristic of Atharvan practice.
## 1
O gods, the one who has been put down, o gods, you lead him up again. and, o gods, the one who has committed an offense, o gods, you make  him live again.
## 2
These two winds blow from the river to the far distance.
Let the one blow skill here for you; let the other blow far away what is  malady.
## 3
O Wind, blow healing here; o Wind, blow away what is malady,
for you, possessing all healing, speed as the messenger of the gods. 4. I have come to you with beneficial things, and also with noninjurious  things.
I have brought auspicious skill for you; I drive your disease far away.
## 5
Let the gods bring rescue here; let the troop of Maruts bring rescue; let all beings bring rescue, so that this one here will be without malady. 6. These very waters are truly remedies; the waters banish affliction.
The waters are remedies for everything. Let them create a remedy
for you.
## 7
With two hands with their ten branches—my tongue is the lead-cow of  speech —
with the two that free you from affliction, with these two, we touch you.