+++
title = "138"

+++
138 (964) Indra
Aṅga Aurava
6 verses: jagatī
This short hymn celebrating a number of Indra’s great deeds is surprisingly obscure.  It begins without much difficulty, with two verses devoted to the opening of the  Vala cave, though even here there are some puzzles. The second verse ends with the  triumphant appearance of the sun after the cave is opened.
This appearance seems to set the theme for the remaining verses of the  hymn: though these four verses treat several different deeds of Indra (the destruc tion of Pipru’s fortresses in vss. 3–4, the Vr̥tra smashing in at least part of vs. 5),  they share a preoccupation with what we might call the deregulation of cosmic time  and Indra’s participation in and repair of these problems. In 3a the Sun “unhitched  his chariot in the middle of heaven,” an image that seems to suggest that the normal  daily progress of the sun through the sky stopped abruptly and time stood still.  This may, or may not, be a version of Indra’s stealing the wheel of the Sun (see,  e.g., V.29, 31; IV.30.4–5). Two factors favor the identification of the two mythic  allusions. On the one hand, Kutsa generally appears associated with Indra’s theft of  the Sun’s wheel, and he appears in our verse 1. On the other, the final pāda of our  hymn (6c) may refer, very indirectly, to the restoration of the Sun’s wheel in heaven  (see below).
Similar to the stopping of the Sun’s chariot in 3a is the striking incident in 5cd,  also referred to elsewhere (though rarely; see esp. II.15.6, IV.30.8–11), in which  Indra smashes the cart of the goddess Dawn, and she runs away in fear. Again, this  seems to involve a perturbation of the ordinary progress of time. In between, 4c  presents the sun and the moon in some relationship, which is entirely unclear but  which does not seem entirely positive.
The second half of the final verse (6) seems to show Indra remedying the situa tion, perhaps restoring both nightly and daily cosmic time. In 6c he places in heaven1624 X.139
“the apportioner of the months,” presumably the moon, while in 6d “the father”  (pitā́, the final word of the hymn), presumably Father Heaven, “bears the circlet  split apart by you [=Indra].” If we are correct that the stopping of the Sun’s chariot  in 3a is a preliminary to the stealing of his chariot-wheel, then the “wheel-segment”  borne by Heaven could be the disc of the Sun now restored to its proper place.
However, much remains unclear in this hymn, and the interpretations given here  are quite tentative.
## 1
In partnership with you, Indra, these conveyors (of songs), conceiving  the truth, thoroughly split apart the Vala cave,
when, showing favor to the dawns, making the waters flow, you exerted  your wondrous power (on them) and on the fertile cows, for the sake  of Kutsa and at his thought.
## 2
You released the fecund females, and you made the mountains bend. You  drove up the ruddy ones, and you drank the dear honey [=soma].
By your wondrous power you made the wooden (cups) strong for it. The  Sun blazed forth with the song born of truth.
## 3
The Sun unhitched his chariot in the middle of heaven. The Ārya found a  match for the Dāsa.
The firm fortifications of the crafty lord Pipru did Indra throw open,  having acted together with R̥jiśvan.
## 4
Defiant, he threw open the undefiable (fortifications); the unbridled one  pulverized the ungodly treasure-houses.
Like the Sun with the Moon, he took for his own the goods found in the  fortress. Being sung, he shattered his rivals with his flashing (weapon). 5. Possessing weapons that cannot be combatted, the far-ranging
Vr̥tra-smasher, doing his pious work by means of his splitting
(weapon), sharpens (the weapons) to be brandished.
She feared to be battered by Indra’s mace. The preening female ran
away: Dawn left her cart behind.
## 6
These (deeds) worthy of fame are yours exclusively, in that you alone  made him alone to be one lacking the sacrifice.
You set the apportioner of the months [=moon] in heaven. The father  [=Heaven] bears the segment of the wheel that was split off by you.