+++
title = "139"

+++
139 (965) Sūrya (1–3), Visvá ̄vasu (4–6)
Viśvāsu Devagandharva
6 verses: triṣṭubh
This hymn is a companion piece to the previous one (X.138), though the Anukramaṇī ascribes them to different poets and assigns different deities to them. The evidence for their connection includes shared vocabulary and close lexical variants—e.g.,  mádhye ...diváḥ 138.3 and divó mádhye 139.2  “in the middle of heaven”; pradhí (“wheel segment”) 138.6 and paridhí (“encirclement”) 139.4; ahī́ “fertile cow”  138.1, 139.6; daṃsáya / dáṃsas 138.1, 2 “wondrous skill” and dákṣa 139.6 “skill,  capability”—as well as ring composition:  138 begins with two verses about the  opening of the Vala cave and the release of the fertile cows, and the final verse of  139 (vs. 6) returns to exactly this theme.
More subtle is their shared thematic concern. As noted in the introduction to  138, that hymn seems to treat disturbances to the orderly progress of cosmic time  and the heavenly bodies that measure it, the sun, the moon, and dawn. By contrast  X.139 focuses on the sun, in part through its (partial) representations: Savitar (vss.  1, 3) and the heavenly Gandharva (see also I.123, the Vena hymn, where Vena and  the Gandharva represent an amalgam of the sun and Soma). The hymn also depicts  the sun as holding its proper place and performing its proper functions. Though in  this hymn (vs. 2) as in the last one (vs. 3) the sun stands still in the middle of heaven,  in 138 this stoppage seemed ominous, whereas in this hymn the sun’s position seems  designed to give him the best view of the whole phenomenal world. It is repeatedly  emphasized (vss. 1d, 2a, c, 3b) that he (or his representatives) sees everything, and  as heavenly Gandharva he measures the airy realm (5b), again displaying proper  cosmic progress.
It must be admitted, however, that many things remain unclear in this hymn,  particularly verse 4.
## 1
With the rays of the sun, with golden hair, Savitar has raised up the  unaging light from the east.
At his instigation Pūṣan travels—the knowing cowherd surveying all  beings.
## 2
With his eye on men, he sits in the middle of heaven, having filled both  world-halves and the space between.
He watches over (his mares? the ladles?) facing toward ghee, facing in all  directions, between the eastern and the western beacon.
## 3
The foundation of wealth, the assembler of goods, he watches over all  forms with his powers.
Like god Savitar’s, his ordinances hold true; like Indra, he stands at the  confluence of spoils.
## 4
O Soma, the waters, having seen Viśvāvasu the Gandharva, then went  apart by their truth.
Indra, hastening, went down following that (truth?) of theirs. He looked  around the encirclements of the sun.
## 5
Let Viśvāvasu sing it [=truth] to us—the heavenly Gandharva, the  measurer of the airy realm—
whether we know it to hold true or not. Spurring on insights, he should  help just our insights.

## 6
He found the winner in the current of the rivers. He opened the doors for  those with a rock as their pen.
The Gandharva proclaimed their immortal (names). Indra came to know  all about the capability of the fertile cows.