+++
title = "140"

+++
140 (966) Agni
Agni Pāvaka
6 verses:  viṣṭārapaṅkti 1, satobr̥hatī 2–4, upariṣrḁ̄ jjyotis 5, triṣṭubh 6 [per the  Anukramaṇī, but this doesn’t accurately reflect the meter of 5 and 6. Former is rather  satobr̥hatī, while latter is 12 12 12 8]
Metrically varied but unremarkable in contents, this hymn recycles and enchains its  vocabulary and phraseology while staying close to its core message: the ritual fire is  lovely and brilliant, and it brings—or should bring—precious prizes to the humans  who tend it.
## 1
O Agni, yours are fame and vitality; your beams flash greatly, o you with  radiant goods.
You of lofty radiance, with your power you establish a praiseworthy
prize for the pious, o sage poet.
## 2
Of pure luster, of gleaming luster, of unfailing luster, you rise up with  your radiance.
As a son wandering between your two mothers, you approach (them)  helpfully. You fill both world-halves.
## 3
O Child of Nourishment, Jātavedas, delight yourself with good lauds,  when you are roused by hymnic visions.
In you have those of brilliant help assembled precious-born refreshments  of manifold forms.
## 4
O Agni, exerting control, have yourself extended by the (human)
kinsmen. In us (be) riches, o immortal one.
You rule over a wonder lovely to see. You (ful)fill your resolve that
brings gain.
## 5
(You,) the preparer of refreshment for the ceremony, forethoughtful,  holding sway over great benefit, (have they set in front)—
you establish the well-portioned gift of a precious thing: great
refreshment and wealth that brings gain.
## 6
(You) the truthful one, the buffalo lovely for all to see: Agni have the  peoples set in front for benevolence—
you with listening ears, of greatest extent, the divine one have the human  generations (set in front) with a hymn.
