+++
title = "142"

+++
142 (968)
Agni
The four Śārṅgas: Jaritar 1–2, Droṇa 3–4, Sārisrkva 5–6, Stambamitra 7–8 ̥ 8 verses: triṣṭubh, except jagatī 1–2, anuṣṭubh 7–8
Though short, this hymn displays both a well-articulated structure and intricate pat terns of repetition and phonological echoes. The first six verses, in trimeter meter,  have an outer ring (vss. 1, 6) and an inner, thematically contrasting core. Verse 1  praises the protective, ritual fire, and verse 6 returns to this prize-giving fire and  the divine attendance upon it. In between, verses 2–5 describe fire as an ever-more dangerous substance. Though in verse 2 the danger is confined and contrasted with  the poets’ successful productions, the following verses give free rein to the destruc
tive power of wildfire with vivid descriptions of its progress through the land. The final two verses, in a different meter, append a magical charm, to banish  dangerous fire from the land and make that land the abode of water and plants. The Anukramaṇī identifies “the four Śārṅgas” as the poets of the hymn. This is  an allusion to an episode in the Mahābhārata (Śārṅgopākhyānam, MBh I.220–25),

in which four birds, sons of an ascetic, are spared by Agni during the otherwise  complete burning of the Khāṇḍava Forest. This tale almost certainly postdates the  composition of our hymn.
## 01
O Agni, this singer here has come to abide in you, for there exists no  other friendship, o Son of Strength—
for auspicious is your shelter, providing threefold defense. Put away in  the distance the injurious missile.
## 02
Your birth, Agni, is a headlong plunge as you seek nourishment. You  seem to bear down on all creatures at once.
Our teams, our insightful thoughts shall gain the lead. They proceed in  front like cowherds, by themselves.
## 03
And truly you bend around, snapping at the abundant brush, o Agni of  independent power.
And there come to be waste-places in the fields. Let us not antagonize  your missile, your power.
## 04
When you travel to the heights and the depths, snapping, you go in all  directions, like an army in greedy pursuit.
When the wind fans your flame, like a barber a beard you shave the
ground.
## 05
His ranks have appeared opposite—many chariots (along) a single  downward course—
when, o Agni, continually stroking your two arms, you go, bending
downward, along the upstretching earth.
## 06
Let your blasts rear up, let your beam; let your prizes, Agni, for the one  who labors for you.
Arch up, bow down, as you grow. Let all the Vasus attend upon
you today.
## 07
Here is the descending course of the waters, here the settling down of  the sea.
Make yourself another path from this one here. Proceed along it at will. 8. On your course hither and your course away let flowering dūrvā
grass grow,
and ponds and lotus blossoms. Here is the house of the sea.