+++
title = "143"

+++
143 (969)
Aśvins
Atri Sāṃkhya
6 verses: anuṣṭubh
The poet of this hymn is presumably one of the younger Atrids, not the Atri who  is the eponymous poet of the Vth Maṇḍala, and the whole hymn is devoted to requests for help from the Aśvins for him and his fellows. In the first two verses he  asks that the Aśvins aid him as they did others in past times. The third verse offers  recompense for their aid: if they help him to produce insightful poems, these poems  will be for them alone. Verses 4 and 6 expand the targets of the aid from Atri alone  to his ritual companions, while verse 5 offers the mythological example of Bhujyu,  often mentioned elsewhere as a client whose life the Aśvins saved, as a model for  what we ourselves hope for.
## 1
(Make) also this Atri, grown old in the truth, (new again), to drive like a  horse to his goal,
when you two make Kakṣīvant new again, like a chariot.
## 2
(Unloose) also this one, like a prizewinning horse, to which the dustless  (paths) have stretched themselves;
unloose the youngest Atri, like a tight knot, (to stretch) across the
airy realm.
## 3
You two most wondrous, resplendent men, seek to win insights  for Atri,
for then, o men of heaven, your praise song will never again (need) to be  carved up [=shared with other gods].
## 4
O very bountiful Aśvins, your generosity and benevolence are to be  noted in this:
that you will bring us safely across to the broad seat and the (festive)  assembly (of the sacrifice), o men.
## 5
Bhujyu, pitched and tossed in the sea at the far end of the airy realm— you drove to him with your winged ones. O Nāsatyas, make (our
insight?) to win.
## 6
O most munificent ones possessing all property, (attend upon us) with  your favors, like (parents) wishing (our) welfare;
attend to refreshments for us that swell like a spring, o men.