+++
title = "144"

+++
144 (970)
Indra
Suparṇa Tārkṣyaputra or Ūrdhvakrś̥ ana Yāmāyana
6 verses: gāyatrī 1, 3–4, br̥hatī 2, satobr̥hatī 5, viṣṭārapaṅkti 6
Although the Anukramaṇī names Indra as the divinity of this hymn, it is dominated  by Soma. Indra appears only in the first and last (6) verses as the recipient of the  soma drink, represented ring-compositionally by the “drop” (índu) in both verses.  His return to the hymn is anticipated by the minimal te “for you” in the penultimate  verse 5. In between the poet first describes Soma’s talents (vss. 1–2), and then nar
rates (or alludes to the narrative of) the famous theft of Soma by the falcon. This  account is highly poeticized, with vocabulary deployed in obscure metaphors. In  our view both 3a and 4c refer, in very different ways, to the fortresses in which Soma

was confined (see IV.27.1 and IV.26.3 for the hundred fortresses, also keeping in  mind that “fortress” [púr] is grammatically feminine). Since Soma is being guarded  in heaven, when he looks down (vs. 3c) in search of his falcon rescuer he sees clouds,  again metaphorically represented.
The vivifying effects of Soma are treated in verses 5–6, as is his role in reinforc ing the relationship (bandhútā “family tie,” 5d) between gods and men, by means of  the sacrificial offering. Verse 6b may contain the first occurrences of the later notion  of sacrifice as “surrender” (tyāgá, found here in a different nominal derivative of  the same root, tyájas). Indra takes the oblation surrendered by men and places it  among the gods.
## 01
Because this deathless drop here, like a courser, displays his mastery as lifelong skill for you, the ritual adept,
## 02
He is a craftsman in poetic art among us and a mace for the one
generous with gifts.
Like a craftsman, he brings the exhilarating drink with pearls [=bubbles]  on top—the exhilarating drink that gets results.
## 03
Eager for the energetic falcon, the bull among his own females
[=fortresses?]
looked down at those puffing up like snakes [/swelling like fertile cows]  [=clouds?] —
## 04
He whom the fine-feathered (bird), the son of the falcon, brought  here from afar— him who had a hundred wheels [=concentric
fortresses?]—who is the track of the fertile cow—
## 05
Whom the falcon brought here for you with his foot, the cherished  one who keeps the wolf away, who is the ruddy housing of
the stalk—
by him is vitality, is lifetime lengthened for living; through him does our  family tie stay vigilant.
## 06
Thus, by the drop Indra will secure that great surrender (of the offering)  also among the gods.
By your will is vitality, is lifetime lengthened, o you of strong will; by  your will has this soma here been pressed from us.