+++
title = "146"

+++
146 (972)
Lady of the Wilderness (Araṇyānı)̄
Devamuni Airammada
6 verses: anuṣṭubh
This lovely and evocative hymn has been much translated. It is dedicated to the  spirit of the araṇya, the wild place, and the contrast between the wild place and  the settled one, an opposition that runs throughout Indian literature, dominates  the hymn. Despite the ostensible dedication, the poet tries as much as possible  to evade the wilderness and conjure up the safety of the village. From the start,  in the first verse he expresses surprise that the Lady of the Wilderness herself  doesn’t inquire for a village or settlement (grā́mam); he is surprised that she is  not afraid of her own domain. The strange sounds that accompany the Lady in  her progress and the strange (and unidentified) animals that make those sounds  in verse 2 clearly unsettle the poet, and in verses 3 and 4 the poet, seeming him self to be in the wilderness at nightfall, attempts to transform the threatening  sights and sounds of the wild into reassuring domestic scenes—cows grazing  and lowing, woodsmen, the creak of a cart—though this cheerful self-deception  does not last. The poet abruptly breaks off the sequence with “(something) has  shrieked!” The final two verses of this short hymn contain a formal praise of

Araṇyānī, but even this begins with the negative, and slightly nervous, reassur ance that she doesn’t kill unless she’s attacked; the positive portions of the praise  come second.
## 01
O Lady of the Wilderness, Lady of the Wilderness, you there, who seem  to be lost just ahead.
How is that you don’t ask for the village? Does fear not find you at all? 2. When the ciccika (bird?/bug?) helps out the bull-roarer [=frog? bird?] as it  speaks,
the Lady of the Wilderness displays her greatness like (a king?) who
hurtles along amid the clash of cymbals.
## 03
And it’s as if cows are eating and as if a settlement is seen,
and the Lady of the Wilderness at evening—it’s as if there’s a cart
creaking.
## 04
Surely it’s someone calling his cow; surely another has been
splitting wood.
But staying by the Lady of the Wilderness at evening, one imagines
“(Something) has shrieked!”
## 05
In truth, the Lady of the Wilderness does no slaughter, if someone else  does not attack.
Having eaten sweet fruit, one settles down at pleasure.
## 06
Fragrant with ointments, sweet-smelling, providing much food though  she does no plowing,
the Mother of wild beasts, the Lady of the Wilderness have
I proclaimed.