+++
title = "147"

+++
147 (973)
Indra
Suvedas Śairīṣi
5 verses: jagatī, except triṣṭubh 5
The poet begins his hymn (vs. 1, 2ab) by proclaiming his trust in Indra’s “battle  fury” (manyú), on the basis of the god’s deeds and his dominance over the cosmic  spaces. It turns out that the poet has something more than simply praise on his  mind. Indra and his battle fury are much in demand among men in search of vic
tory and its spoils (vs. 2cd), and the poet recommends his patrons to Indra’s atten tion and care (vs. 3). He realizes, however, that securing Indra’s help requires proper  ritual observance (vs. 4). The hymn ends (vs. 5) with explicit requests for Indra’s aid  and bounty, such desires having been only indirectly expressed earlier in the hymn.
## 01
I put my trust in your foremost battle-fury, in that you smashed Vr̥tra  and labored at the manly work,
in that both world-halves yield to you and even earth trembles from your  tempest, o possessor of the stone. 2. You, faultless one, with your wiles shook wily Vr̥tra to pieces, with your  fame-seeking mind.
Just you do superior men choose in their quests for cattle, you when all  sacrifices are to be offered.
## 03
Take pleasure in these patrons, o much-invoked one, the strengtheners  who have attained to your bounty, bounteous one.
They chant to (you) the prizewinner when kith and kin (are at issue), in  (hostile) encirclements, at the winning of wisdom, when immoderate  stakes (are set).
## 04
Just that man will find pleasure in wealth that is easy to bear away who  will realize that the exhilaration of this one [=Indra] is to be hastened. With you as his strengthener, bounteous one, one who performs pious  ceremonies quickly bears away the prize, the stakes, along with
his men.
## 05
You—being sung, make wide (space) for the troop with your greatness,  bounteous one; show mastery over wealth.
You are an ally [/Mitra] to us, wily like Varuṇa. You distribute (wealth)  like an apportioner of food, wondrous one.