+++
title = "148"

+++
148 (974) Indra
Prthu Vainya ̥
5 verses: triṣṭubh
This hymn offers some tricky bits of syntax and phraseology in what is otherwise  a standard praise of Indra and request for his aid. The poet seems especially  aware that Indra bestows his aid on those whom he likes (see esp. vss. 1c, 3b,  4c) and so emphasizes men’s need to offer abundant praise and oblations with a  cheerful spirit.
## 1
After having pressed soma we praise you, Indra, and also after having  won the prize, you powerfully manly one.
Bring us well-being (for him) in whom you take pleasure. Through
ourselves and our lineage may we win, aided by you.
## 2
Lofty were you when you were just born, o champion Indra. Along with  the sun, you should overcome the Dāsa clans,
(as you did) the one placed in hiding, fit to be hidden, hidden in the
waters [=Vr̥tra]. We offer soma as if in a gushing (stream).
## 3
Or, (Indra,) chant in response to the hymns of the stranger—as the wise  one, inspired poet among the seers, taking pleasure in good thinking. May we be the ones who find enjoyment by means of the soma drinks— through this and through the portions for you, who are conveyed on a  chariot.1634 X.149
## 4
These sacred formulations here have been recited to you, Indra. Give the  might of men to men, o champion.
Be of the same resolve with those in whom you take pleasure. And
protect the singers and their people.
## 5
Hear the call from Pr̥thī, o champion Indra, and you will be praised by  the chants of Venya,
who has roared toward your ghee-filled womb. Like a wave along the  depths, (his chants) run (there) billowing.