+++
title = "149"

+++
149 (975)
Savitar
Arcat Hairaṇyastūpa
5 verses: triṣṭubh
The poet of this hymn is identified by the Anukramaṇī as a descendant of  Hiraṇyastūpa, and in the last verse (6) the poet compares his own invocation of  Savitar with that of Hiraṇyastūpa Āṅgirasa, who, in fact, appears in the Anukramaṇī as the author of I.31–35 and IX.4 and 6—with I.35 also a hymn to Savitar. Thus this  hymn may be making a cross reference to another hymn in the samḥitā. Although  there are no blatant links between the two hymns, both are concerned with the  divisions of the cosmos and Savitar’s relationship to them. In this hymn especially  Savitar’s cosmogonic role is highlighted.
## 1
Savitar brought the earth to rest with his fastening straps; in the place  with no prop Savitar made heaven fast.
Savitar has milked the boisterous midspace like a stallion, (has milked  out) the sea bound within the unfathomable (realm).
## 2
Where the propped-up sea flooded forth—Savitar knows that, o Child of  the Waters—
from there was the world, from there was the airy realm arisen; from  there heaven and earth spread out.
## 3
After this (world) here there came into being the other one [=heaven],  deserving the sacrifice, with its fill of immortal creation.
Certainly the fine-feathered Garutmant(-bird) of Savitar [=sun] was
born earlier, and it (was born) in accordance with his support.
## 4
Like cows to the village, like a warrior to his horses, like a bellowing,  benevolent milker to her calf,
like a husband to his wife—let him come down to us, the supporter of  heaven, Savitar bringing all desirable things.
## 5
Just as Hiraṇyastūpa Āṅgirasa called on you, Savitar, when this prize  (was in question),
even so, chanting to you for help, extolling you, I stay wakeful facing  toward you, as if toward the plant of soma.