+++
title = "150"

+++
150 (976)
Agni
Mrḍ̥ īka Vāsiṣṭha
5 verses: br̥hatī 1–3, upariṣṭājjyotis or jagatī 4, upariṣṭājjyotis 5
A simple hymn with a rigid skeletal structure, despite the variety of meters. The last  pāda of every verse begins with a form of mr̥ḍīká “grace, mercy,” in all but verse  4 the dative mr̥ḍīkā́ya. (This repetition is clearly responsible for the Anukramaṇī’s  ascription to a poet with the given name Mr̥ḍīka.) The object of the poet’s address  throughout is the god Agni; for the first half of the hymn (through vs. 3ab) he is  unnamed though easily identifiable from his attributes; from then on a form of  his name opens every hemistich. The contents of the hymn are quite straightfor
ward: Agni is urged to come to our sacrifice, bringing the gods along. In the final  verse (5) his aid to various legendary humans is recalled, and the poet names him self as Vasiṣṭha (or “best one”)—again, no doubt responsible for the Anukramaṇī’s  patronymic Vāsiṣṭha, although the distinctive clan refrain of the Vasiṣṭhas is not  present.
The final two verses also contain the epithet puróhita, literally “set in front,”  applied first to Agni (4a) and then to the poet Vasiṣṭha (5cd). Ritually speaking  the sacrificial fire is indeed “set in front”:  the offering fire is established on the  eastern edge of the ritual ground. However, there is no clear ritual reason to refer  to the poet as “set in front,” and it seems likely that in this late hymn the term has  already become the designation of a particular type of priest, in later times the  king’s “house-priest.”
## 1
Even when you have been kindled, you are kindled (again), o
oblation-bearer for the gods.
With the Ādityas, the Rudras, the Vasus, come to us here. For grace
come to us here.
## 2
This sacrifice here—having delighted in this speech, come near to it. We mortals call you, kindled one; for grace we call.
## 3
You, Jātavedas, granting all wishes, do I hymn with my insightful  thought.
O Agni, bring here to us the gods whose commandments are dear, for  grace (bring) those whose commandments are dear.
## 4
Agni, the god, became the one set in front [/Purohita] of the gods; Agni  have the human seers kindled.
Agni do I invoke greatly at the winning of the stakes; (I invoke) his grace  for the winning of the stakes.
## 5
Agni helped Atri, Bharadvāja, Gaviṣṭhira, helped Kaṇva and Trasadasyu  for us at the challenge.
Agni does Vasiṣṭha, set in front [/Purohita], call; for grace does the one  set in front [/Purohita] (call).
1636 X.151–152