+++
title = "151"

+++
151 (977) Śraddhā
Śraddhā Kāmāyanī
5 verses: anuṣṭubh
The word śraddhā́, often translated “faith,” has a long and culturally freighted his tory in Indic religion. In its Vedic origins it refers not to “faith,” at least in the  Western, Christian sense (cf. its Latin cognate credō), but rather to “trust”—espe cially in the efficacy of cultural institutions, and there especially in hospitality and  the sacrifice, itself a specialized type of hospitality. (For further discussion see  Jamison [1996a: 176–84].)
In this hymn its close ties to the sacrifice are quite clear. Note especially the  last verse (5), which makes not-so-veiled reference to the three soma-pressings; the  appearance of Vāyu in the previous verse probably refers to the fact that he receives  the first soma offering at the Morning Pressing. One of the important facets of  trust in the sacrifice is the certainty that a properly performed sacrifice will produce  material rewards for the performer, and this belief is reflected throughout the hymn;  see especially verses 2–4.
## 1
With trust is the fire kindled; with trust is the oblation poured.
We at the head of good fortune make known our trust with speech.
## 2
O Trust, this (speech) spoken by me: make it dear to him who gives, dear  to him who intends to give,
and dear among the benefactors who offer sacrifice, o Trust.
## 3
Just the gods created trust in themselves among the powerful lords, so among the benefactors who offer sacrifice make what has been spoken  by us trust(ed).
## 4
Trust do the gods revere, sacrificing for themselves with Vāyu as their  herdsman—
trust, with a purpose that comes from their heart. By trust one gains  possession of goods.
## 5
Trust do we call early in the morning, trust at midday,
trust at the setting of the sun. O Trust, place a trusting heart
here in us.