+++
title = "155"

+++
155 (981)
Spell to Remove Misfortune (1, 4), Brahmaṇaspati  (2–3), All Gods (5) [Against a Witch]
Śirimbiṭha Bhāradvāja
5 verses: anuṣṭubh
A type of female demon known as the Sadān(u)vā is the target of this Atharvan type hymn; the Sadānvā is found only here in the R̥gveda, but is well represented  in the Atharvaveda (AVŚ II.14, AVP II.4, V.1 and 9, VI.8.1, etc.; see further dis cussion and references in Zehnder 1999, Lubotsky 2002, Griffiths 2009 ad locc.).  The Sadānvās are monumentally ugly (vs. 1) and seem to pose a threat especially  to unborn children (vs. 2) and, in the Atharvaveda passages, to the household and  livestock in general. In this hymn they are also sexually menacing and sexually  repulsive (vs. 4).
In the first three verses the Sadānvā is attacked and sent away in good Atharvan  fashion, but the hymn takes another rhetorical turn starting in verse 4, which  announces the defeat of Indra’s rivals in the high style of a victory paean, to the apparent accompaniment of the Sadānvās beating their breasts in stylized mourn ing. And in verse 5 the defeat of the hostile forces has been effected not by an  Atharvan-like charm, as in the earlier parts of the hymn, but by ritual activity on the  sacrificial ground and by the creation of “fame” among the gods—both features that  are associated with the more solemn R̥gvedic priestly and martial ethic. This shift in  diction and attitude is striking, and it may have been felt necessary (or at least desir able) to “R̥gvedify” the charm when it was incorporated into the R̥gveda collection.
## 1
You one-eyed, deformed demoness, go to the mountain—you Sadānvā. With the warriors of Śirimbiṭha, with them we banish you.
## 2
She is banished from here, banished from yonder, having assailed all  fetuses.
Go at the demoness, o sharp-horned Brahmaṇaspati, and gore her.
## 3
That piece of wood over there that floats to the farther shore of the river  with no man at the helm,
grab hold of that, you with your evil jaws: with it go in the farther
distance.
## 4
When you women with rusty “boxes” [=genitals], leaning forward, *beat  your breast,
slain were all the rivals of Indra—with their ejaculations [“spurts”]
(dissipated like) bubbles.
## 5
These (men) here have led the cow around; they have taken the fire  around.
They have made themselves fame among the gods. Who will venture  against them?