+++
title = "158"

+++
158 (984) Sūrya
Cakṣus Saurya
5 verses: gāyatrī
The sun as the eye in heaven, which enables us to see ourselves and the world, is  the theme of this hymn, especially of the last three verses (3–5). The first verse is a request for universal protection in all parts of the cosmos; the ablative (“from”)  phrases are ambiguous: they may refer to hostile forces located in the various parts  of the cosmos, or to the locations from which the protectors are exercising their  function. The second verse to Savitar continues the protection theme, but otherwise  ill fits the hymn and may be here because of Savitar’s role in verse 3.
The given name assigned to the poet by the Anukramaṇī, Cakṣus, is simply  adopted from the common noun cákṣus “eye” found repeatedly in verses 3–4; his  patronymic means “Son of Sūrya.”
## 1
Let the Sun protect us from heaven, the Wind from the midspace;
let Agni (protect) us from the earthly ones.
## 2
I shall find pleasure in you, o Savitar, whose flaring is worth a hundred  impulsions [/soma-pressings].
Protect us from the heavenly missile as it flies.
## 3
The eye [=sun] (let) god Savitar (place) for us, and the eye (let) the  Mountain;
the eye let the Placer place for us.
## 4
Place the eye for our eyeing, the eye for us to see for ourselves.
May we look at this (world) both whole and distinct.
## 5
May we look toward you, wholly good to see, o Sun.
May we, (though) we have the eyes of men [/(because) we possess the  “eye of men” (=sun)], see distinctly.