+++
title = "159"

+++
159 (985)
Against Cowives
Śacī Paulomī
6 verses: anuṣṭubh
Like X.145 this hymn is in the voice of a woman, speaking in the 1st person, against  her cowives. But, whereas in X.145 she was in the act of performing the spell with  which she hoped to vanquish her cowife, in this hymn her triumph is complete. She  recites a victory paean, in the appropriate high rhetorical style—albeit with some  dips into the vernacular, such as the diminutivized derivative of the personal pro
noun in verse 1, māmaká “li’l ole me.” It is worth noting that in verse 3 she extends  her triumph to her sons and her daughter; as the early parts of the Rāmāyaṇa teach  us, one of the most important reasons that cowives plot against each other is to  secure preferment for their children.
## 01
Up has gone yonder sun; up this good fortune of li’l ole me.
I, a cunning woman, now have gained victory over my husband, (so that  I am) victorious.
## 02
I am the beacon; I am the head; I am the powerful debater.
Only my will should my husband follow, when I am victorious.

## 03
My sons are rival-smiters, and my daughter is a wide ruler.
And I am a complete conqueror. To my husband my signal-call is the  highest.
## 04
The oblation through which Indra, when he performed it, became the  highest brilliant one,
that (oblation) I have now performed, o gods: I have therefore become  without cowives.
## 05
Without cowives, smiting cowives, conquering, overcoming—
I have ripped off the luster of the other women, like the gifts of the
feckless.
## 06
I have completely conquered them, overcoming the cowives,
so that I will rule widely over this hero and over his people.