+++
title = "160"

+++
160 (986) Indra
Purāṇa Vāiśvāmitra
5 verses: triṣṭubh
A straightforward invitation to soma-drinking, also expressing the usual fear that  Indra will attend another sacrifice (vs. 1) and the usual smug awareness that a non presser will be punished (vs. 4). According to the Anukramaṇī, the poet is a descen dant of the Viśvāmitras, and the last two words of the hymn, śunáṃ huvema “for  blessing we would invoke” are the first two words of the Viśvāmitra clan refrain,  found in most of the Viśvāmitra triṣṭubh Indra hymns (III.30.22, etc.).
## 1
Drink of this sharp vitalizing (soma). Here unhitch your two fallow bays,  chariot and all.
O Indra, let the other sacrificers not stop you: yours are these pressed  (soma drinks) here.
## 2
Yours are those (already) pressed and yours are those to be pressed. You  do the swelling hymns call hither.
O Indra, enjoying this pressing today, knowing everything, drink the  soma here.
## 3
The man who with willing mind, with his whole heart, with desire for the  gods, presses soma for him,
Indra does not give away his cows. He [=presser] makes (his soma)
acclaimed and dear to him [=Indra].
## 4
That one becomes spied out by him—the rich man who does not press  soma for him.
The bounteous one holds him out by the elbow [=at arm’s length?].
The one without precedent [=Indra] smites the haters of sacred
formulations.
## 5
Seeking horses, seeking cows, seeking prizes, we call upon you to come  right up to us.
Attending to your new benevolence, we would invoke you for
blessing, Indra.