+++
title = "162"

+++
162 (988)
Against Miscarriage
Rakṣohan Brāhma
6 verses: anuṣṭubh
This charm is meant to deflect the dangers of miscarriage or harm to the embryo  in any stage, including immediately after birth. The stages of pregnancy are nicely1644 X.163
laid out in verse 3, a good example of the indirect means by which we can gain  information about Vedic people’s knowledge and conceptualization of “real life.”  The methods by which the “ill-named affliction” might gain access to the fetus are  graphically depicted in verses 4–6. In verse 5 it is somewhat startling that masquer
ading as a brother (in addition to husband or lover) would give intimate access to  the pregnant woman; this whiff of incest is reminiscent of the situation between the  siblings Yama and Yamī in X.10.
## 1
In concert with a sacred formulation let Agni, demon-smasher, repel  from here
whatever evil-named affliction lies on your embryo, in your womb.
## 2
Whatever evil-named affliction lies on your embryo, in your womb, Agni, along with a sacred formulation, has banished the flesh-eater.
## 3
Who smites your (embryo) as it flies, when it is emplanted, as it squirms, who intends to smite your (embryo) when it is just born, that one we  banish from here.
## 4
Who pries apart your thighs, lies between the married couple,
who licks within your womb, that one we banish from here.
## 5
Who, having become brother, husband, lover, goes down on you,
who intends to smite your offspring, that one we banish from here.
## 6
Who, having stupefied you with sleep, with darkness, goes down on you, who intends to smite your offspring, that one we banish from here.