+++
title = "163"

+++
163 (989) Against Disease
Vivrhan K ̥ āśyapa
6 verses: anuṣṭubh
Like X.161, this is another charm against disease with Atharvan parallels (AVŚ II.33, AVP IV.7). This hymn provides us with what we might term a body-part  litany. The officiant declares the removal of disease from a series of related body  parts in each verse, each associated with a particular area of the body—another  valuable window on how Vedic peoples divided up and named reality. Although the  names of the more standard body parts (eyes, ears, etc.) are well known and have  well-established cognates, the identification of some of the more obscure terms is  uncertain, though the locational association narrows the range of possibilities.
## 1
From your eyes, your nostrils, your ears, your chin,
I tear the disease of the head out of you—from your brain, your
tongue.
## 2
From your neck(bones?), the (bones of the?) nape of your neck, your  vertebrae, your backbone,
I tear the disease of the torso out of you—from your shoulders, from  your arms. 3. From your entrails, your guts, your rectum, your heart,
I tear out the disease—from your kidneys, your liver, your intestines.
## 4
From your thighs, your knee-sockets, your heels, the front of your feet, I tear out the disease—from your hips, your backside, your buttocks. 5. From your urinator, your love-maker, your hair, your nails,
I tear this disease here out—from your whole body.
## 6
From every limb, from every hair, what is born in every joint,
I tear this disease here out—from your whole body.