+++
title = "165"

+++
165 (991)
All Gods (Bird of Ill Omen)
Kapota Nairrtḁ
5 verses: triṣṭubh
Though the Anukramaṇī identifies the dedicands as the All Gods, the hymn is  entirely devoted to countering the possible evil effects of a bird of ill-omen, the  dove of death, sent as a messenger from Yama, the lord of the dead. Not surpris ingly, given their style and contents, the verses of this hymn are found in variant  form in the Atharvaveda (AVŚ VI.27, 29.1, 28.1).
## 01
O gods, when the dove, sent as a messenger of Dissolution, has come  here to seek,
we will chant to it, and we will perform expulsion. Let there be weal for  our two-footed, weal for our four-footed.
## 02
Let the dove that has been sent be kindly to us; o gods, let the omen-bird  be without offense in our house.
Let Agni, the inspired poet, take pleasure in our oblation, and so let the  winged missile avoid us.
## 03
The winged missile will not take us by deception. In the corner [?] it sets  its footprint in the fireplace.
Let there be weal for our cattle and for our humans. Let the dove not  harm us here, o gods.
## 04
When the owl screeches, that comes to nothing; likewise when the dove  set its footprint in the fire.
The one for whom it was sent forth as messenger—to that one let there  be reverence: to Yama, (who is) Death.
## 05
With (this) verse give the dove a push. Rejoicing in refreshment, lead  your cow around,
effacing all difficulties. Having left for us our strengthening nourishment,  it will fly away the fastest in flight.