+++
title = "166"

+++
166 (992)
Against Rivals
R̥ṣabha Vairāja or R̥ṣabha Śākvara
5 verses: anuṣṭubh, except mahāpaṅkti 5
The extremely aggressive 1st-person speaker of this hymn proclaims his triumph  over his rivals and their utter humiliation. Using the well-nigh universal tropes of  high and low, he repeatedly emphasizes the spatial (and thus conceptual) position  of his defeated enemies, who are literally beneath his feet (vss. 2, 5; see also vss. 3–4).  Verse 4 is notable for the trio of attributes that the speaker seizes from his rivals,  a set that easily accommodates a trifunctional (Dumézilian) analysis: “cognition”  as the higher mental power appropriate to the priestly First Function, “command
ment” representative of the warrior-ruler Second Function, and “company, assem bly” the Third Function mass of followers. Although we are not over-sympathetic  to the Dumézilian paradigm, this particular passage gains resonance from such an  analysis.
## 01
Make me bull over my equals, widely victorious over my rivals,
smiter of my rivals, wide-ruling cattle-lord of cattle.
## 02
I am a smiter of rivals, like Indra, unharmable, invulnerable.
Beneath my feet are my rivals: all these here have been stood upon.
## 03
Right here I bind you, like the two ends of a bow with a bowstring. O Lord of Speech, drive these down, so that they will speak lower
than me.
## 04
I have come here on top, with Viśvakarman as my foundation.
I take for myself your cognition, your commandment, and your
assembled company.
## 05
Having taken for myself your yoking up [=war] and your peace, might  I become the highest. I have trampled on your head.
From beneath my feet, lift up your speech to me, like frogs from the
water, like frogs from the water.