+++
title = "168"

+++
168 (994)
Vāyu
Anila Vātāyana
4 verses: triṣṭubh
As with X.186, the Anukramaṇī identifies the deity of the hymn as Vāyu, the god of  wind who has been integrated into the ritual system, as the first god, with Indra, to  receive the soma drink at the Morning Pressing. But again, as in X.186, the hymn  only mentions Vāta, a god of wind with more physical and natural characteristics of  wind than Vāyu and little or no ritual profile. Nonetheless, Vāta is given full-dress  eulogistic treatment in this little hymn: The first verse begins with his name, and  the opening, “now the greatness [acc.] of Wind... ” (vā́tasya nú mahimā́nam...),  recalls celebratory openings like I.32.1 índrasya nú vīryā̀ṇi... “now the heroic deeds  of Indra ... ”). The final pāda (vs. 4d) is a standard formula of homage, with the  recipient in the dative (“to him, to Wind... ”) and an instrumental of the type of  offering (“with our oblation”), ending with the 1st plural optative vidhema “might  we do honor”); see numerous parallels, including VIII.48.12–13, I.121.1–9.
In between the swift progress of Wind, his chariot, and his retinue (which we  consider to be the eddies and gusts that are characteristic of any strong wind) is  nicely described.
## 1
Now (I shall proclaim) the greatness of Wind and of his
chariot: shattering as he goes; thundering is his sound.
Touching heaven as he drives, turning things red, and tossing up dust  from the earth as he goes. 2. The dispersed eddies of the Wind press forward together following (him).  They go to him, like girls to a festive gathering.
Yoked together with them on the same chariot, the god speeds on as  king of this whole world.
## 3
Speeding along the paths in the midspace, he does not settle down on any  single day.
Comrade of the waters, the first-born abiding by truth—where was he  born? from where has he arisen?
## 4
The breath of the gods, the embryo of the world, this god wanders as he  wishes.
Only his sounds are heard, not his form. To him, to the Wind, we would  do honor with our oblation.