+++
title = "172"

+++
172 (998)
Dawn
Saṃvarta Āṅgirasa
4 verses: dvipadā virāj
Although the Anukramaṇī identifies the divinity of this hymn as Dawn, only the  last verse (4) clearly belongs to her, and, at least in verse 2, the masculine adjectives  preclude Dawn as subject. Commentators have suggested other deities: Dawn (vs.  1), Sūrya (vs. 2), Agni (vs. 3), Dawn (vs. 4), or Sūrya (vss. 1–3). These particular  identifications cannot be confirmed, but it is clear that this is a hymn appropriate to  early morning. In verse 2 the subject awakens mortals. Though verse 1 is less clear,  the cows there are on the move after giving milk (in our interpretation):  as real  cows, they are going to pasture after the morning milking; as dawn cows they are  following the track of the sun out of the east and across the sky, having filled the  sky with their milky light. In the third verse the sacrifice is begun, as is appropriate  at dawn. And finally in verse 4 Dawn makes an explicit appearance upon her birth.
## 1
Drive here along with your longing. The cows follow your track, when  (they have given milk) with their udders.
## 2
Drive here with good insight, as the most bounteous one, along with those  of good gifts, as you awaken the bountiful while aging the combatants. 3. Like those bringing food, having good gifts we lay out the thread (of  sacrifice): let us perform sacrifice.
## 4
Dawn (rolls) out of the way the darkness of her sister (Night), rolls her  track up in a ball, because she has been well born (just now).