+++
title = "173"

+++
173 (999)
Praise of the King (Royal Consecration)
Dhruva Āṅgirasa
6 verses: anuṣṭubh
This hymn has long been seen as part of a royal consecration (Rājasūya, a term first  found in the Atharvaveda), whatever that rite would have looked like in late R̥gvedic  times. The keyword of the hymn is dhruvá “firm”—firmness being the quality most  desired in the royal candidate—and in fact the Anukramaṇī has extracted this word  for the name of the poet. The affirmation of the chosen king by both the human clans  (viś, vss. 1, 6) and various gods is required. Among the gods we find Indra, the arche
typal warrior king (vss. 2, 5–6), and Varuṇa, the archetypal peacetime king (vs. 5). (For  these two aspects of kingship, divided between the two gods, see especially IV.42.) In  addition there are the ritually connected gods, who would officiate at the consecration  ceremony: Brahmaṇaspati (vs. 3)/Br̥haspati (vs. 5), who represent the verbal portion,  and Agni (vs. 5) and Soma (vs. 3), who participate in the physical portion. Soma, as  ritual substance, is found in verse 6, which effects the king’s installation. The hymn  has parallels in both recensions of the Atharvaveda, and elsewhere in Vedic literature.
1652 X.174–175
## 01
I have brought you here: be among (us). Stand firm, without wavering. Let all the clans want you. Let kingship not fall away from you.
## 02
Be only here; do not budge—unwavering like a mountain.
Like Indra, stand firm here; here uphold your kingship.
## 03
This one here has Indra upheld—firm with a firm oblation.
For him Soma will bear witness; for him Brahmaṇaspati.
## 04
Firm is heaven, firm the earth, firm these mountains here.
Firm all this animate world, firm right here this king of the clans.
## 05
Firm let King Varuṇa, firm let God Br̥haspati,
firm let both Indra and Agni uphold your kingship—firm!
## 06
We touch firm soma with a firm oblation.
And now Indra will make the clans bring tribute only to you.