+++
title = "183"

+++
183 (1009)
For the Birth of a Son [To the Sacrificer (1), the  Sacrificer’s Wife (2), and the Hotar (3)]
Prajāvat Prājāpatya
3 verses: triṣṭubh
The first two verses present a fragment of dialogue, with patterned repetition,  between a wife and a husband, preparatory to attempting to conceive a son. As  Geldner points out, the situation seems to be similar to that depicted in I.179 (the  Agastya–Lopāmudrā dialogue), with the husband ending a period of asceticism  (see vs. 1b) and the wife eager for sex and its product, children. It thus conforms to  the pattern common throughout Indian literature of the reluctant ascetic and the  sexually aggressive female (see Jamison 1996a: 15–17 and passim), but in the short  exchange here the husband seems more amenable than usual, and the rhetorical  responsions between the two verses make the pair seem more attuned to each other.  The final verse (3) is spoken by an unidentified spirit responsible for all sorts of  fertility, who promises sons.
## 01
[Wife:] I saw you with my mind, as you became ever more cognizant with  yours, you born from fervor, developed from fervor.
Bestowing progeny here, wealth here, progenerate yourself with progeny,  o you who desire sons.
## 02
[Husband:] I saw you with my mind, as you became ever more intent  with yours, being in distress in your own body at your period.
Up here, near to me. You should become a young woman (again).
Progenerate yourself with progeny, o you lady desiring sons.
## 03
I placed the embryo in the plants, I within all creatures.
I generated progeny on earth, I (will generate) sons for wives in the
future.