+++
title = "191"

+++
191 (1017)
Agni (1), Unity (2–4)
Saṃvanana Āṅgirasa
4 verses: anuṣṭubh, except triṣṭubh 3
This last hymn in the R̥gveda has a programmatic and propagandistic agenda.  The R̥gveda Saṃhitā (“Collection”) has assembled the poetic products of numer ous separate clans, who also had their own cultic practices and who presumably coexisted in an uneasy vacillation between semi-hostility and wary cooperation.  This hymn collection was produced under the new circumstances of a centralized  (or centralizing) sociopolitical regime, generally considered to be the Kuru kings,  which sought to impose (or encourage) a standardized, shared ritual culture—the  R̥gveda collection being its most enduring product—that would also support the  political unification.
The hymn begins (vs. 1) with the ritual fire, which brings all the Ārya together,  including those who don’t seem to want it (1b), and is the most visible representa tion of the underlying unity of their ritual praxis. There’s an implicit warning in  this verse: the ritual fire itself will appropriate the goods of any hold-outs. Verse 2  then provides a positive model: like the gods, who put aside their differences to take  their common shares in the sacrifice, we should make a common sacrifice (which,  implicitly it is said, will make us more successful, once we no long have to compete  among ourselves all the time). Verse 3 outlines the results of the program to devise  a standardized ritual shared by all. The second half of this verse is a virtual speech  act: the speaker performs the two fundamental components of the ritual—ritual  speech (the mantra) and ritual action (the oblation)—thus by this announcement  effectively creating the new, shared ritual. Verse 4 promises that the results will be  worth the effort. For further discussion, see Proferes (2007: 11 and passim).
## 01
Over and over, o Agni, you bull, you wrest together all things from the  stranger.
You are kindled in the footprint of refreshment. Bring goods here to us. 2. Come together, speak together; together let your thoughts agree,
just as the gods of long ago, coming to an agreement together, reverently  approach their sacrificial portion.
## 03
Common to them all is the solemn utterance, common the assembly,  common their thought along with their perception.
I (hereby) utter an utterance common to you all on your behalf; with an  oblation common to you all I offer on your behalf.
## 04
Common is your purpose; common your hearts;
let your thought be common, so that it will go well for you together.