+++
title = "05"

+++
In pāda b the HvN text reads mahé vā́jāyām ṛ́tāya śrávāṃsi, with word break after putative vā́jāyām. But it should instead read vā́jāyāmṛ́tāya without break (as in both the devanāgarī text and the transliterated text of Aufrecht), to be analyzed, with Pp., as vā́jāya / amṛ́tāya. Undoing the vowel contraction at the caesura in this way produces too many syllables (12, with a Triṣṭubh cadence). Old is uncertain whether to opt for that analysis or for contraction over the caesura, which seems to be Arnold’s (not very clearly expressed) view (p. 192, §215 iii).

Given the importance of vā́ja- ‘prize’ (1a, 5b, 6d ) and vājín- ‘prizewinner’ (1c, 4d)) in this hymn, the tr. of the dat. phrase in pāda b should be corrected to “for the great immortal prize.” In keeping with my view that medial forms of the them. stem pávate are always reflexive, not passive, the tr. should be corrected to “purifying themselves through the filters” - esp. because of the contrastive undoubted passive pūyámānaḥ in the next vs. ### 06
The gen. jánānām is best construed with puruhūtáḥ as (pseudo-)agent. See the same phrase, though with accented voc. púruhūta, in IX.52.4, 64.27 - though in the former passage I construe the gen. with another noun in the publ. tr. I now think that may be wrong.

The accentuation of the athem. part. túñjāna- is puzzling; the other ex. of this part. (IX.57.2) has the expected accent tuñjāná- as do finite forms like tuñjánti.

There also exists a single form of a thematic med. part. túñjamāna- (III.1.16) also with unexpected accent on the root syllable. Gotō (1st Kl, 78) suggests this form is “metrical” for the athem. form, but does not treat the accent.

The finale of d, abhí vā́jam arṣa, is identical to the end of 1b.

