+++
title = "09"

+++
The publ. tr. takes pāda c as a second complement of pári yāsi in pāda a, parallel to rāśím … gónām. By contrast both Ge and Re take c as the obj. (or pseudoobj.) of śíkṣā in d: e.g., “Suche uns … viele grosse Labsale zu erwirken.” But the lexicalized desid. stem śíkṣa- does not take an obj., but only a dative of benefit (see comm. ad VI.31.4), and so that interpr. seems blocked to me. However, it may be an independent nominal clause: “many are (your) lofty refreshments,” the interpr. I would now favor. Scar’s (636-37) interpr. is similar, though he then sneaks c in as an understood obj. of śíkṣā: “ Viel, gross sind die Labungen … verhilf [zu diesen]” or “… verhilf uns [dazu],” which seems unnec.

All the standard interpr. (incl. the publ. tr.) take the last three words as a separate clause, but this short phrase poses several problems. First, tā́ḥ is a nom. (/acc.) plural fem. demonst., but the following word, the hapax root noun upaṣṭút, is by all appearances singular. Several solutions have been proposed to this mismatch.

Ge simply says (n. 9d) that upaṣṭút at the end of the hymn represents pl. upaṣṭútaḥ, which is not very satisfactory. He tr. “Dein sind diese Lobpreisungen.” Old has two suggestions: 1) upaśṭút is adverbial: “in einer zu den stútaḥ gerichteten Bewegung,” citing phrases like stutī́r úpa (I.84.2). But he gives no parallels for such adverbial formation (maybe the likewise problematic dakṣiṇít?), and it is also hard to see how this would work in context (“these are in the direction of your praise”??). 2) upastút is an agent noun: Soma as praiser. But he rejects this even as he suggests it. Scar (636-37) discusses previous suggestions and suggests further possibiities. Re’s solution as embodied in his tr. “Ces (avantages sont) ta louange (même),” with an equational sentence equating tā́ḥ with upaṣṭút, seems to me the best way to deal with the number disharmony - though in his n. Re floats several other, less compelling possibilities. The question then is what is the reference of tā́ḥ. I’m not sure what Re means by “avantages.” I think the most likely referent is the fem. pl. in the immediately preceding pāda: íṣaḥ ‘refreshments’, and Re’s n. gives what I consider the clue to the interpr. of the whole in his citation of the cmpd. iṣa(ḥ)stút- in V.50.5 (though in fact he cites it in service of a different solution). In V.50.5 iṣa(ḥ)stúto manāmahe I tr. “Let us conceive praise-songs as refreshment” (see comm. ad loc.).

Here I suggest that we are announcing our praise-song as Indra’s refreshments, the counterpart to the refreshments he offers us. The publ. tr. does not convey this sense; it should be changed to “These (refreshments) are (our) praise for you.” The retroflexion in upaṣṭút- is extremely puzzling, esp. given the nonretroflexed úpastuta- (upastutá-), úpastuti-, upastútya-. AiG I.237 registers the form, but simply says that sometimes -ṣ- in cmpds spreads beyond its proper domain, which isn’t terribly helpful.