+++
title = "22"

+++
22. The following persons sanctify the company if they eat at a funeral-sacrifice, viz. one who has studied the three verses of the Veda containing the word 'Madhu,' each three times; one who has studied the part of the Veda containing the word 'Suparṇa' three times; a Triṇāciketa; one who has studied the Mantras required for the four sacrifices (called Aśvamedha, Puruṣamedha, Sarvamedha, and Pitṛmedha); one who keeps five fires; one who knows the Sāman called Jyeṣṭha; one who fulfils the duty of daily study; the son of one who has studied and is able to teach the whole Veda with its Aṅgas, and a Śrotriya. [^12] 


[^12]:  Compare Manu III, 185, 186; Yājñ. I, 219-221. The three verses to be known by a Trimadhu are, Madhu vātā ṛtāyate, &c., which occur both in the Taitt. Saṃh. and in the Taitt. Ār. The explanation of Trisuparṇa is not certain. Haradatta thinks that it may mean either a person who knows the three verses Catushkapardā yuvatiḥ supeśā, &c., Taittirīya-brāhmaṇa I, 2, 1, 27, &c., or one who knows the three Anuvākas from the Taittirīya Āraṇyaka X, 48-50, beginning, Brahmametu mām, &c. The word 'Triṇāciketa' has three explanations:--a. A person who knows the Nāciketa-fire according to the Taittirīyaka, Kaṭhavallī, and the Śatapatha, i.e. has studied the portions on the Nāciketa-fire in these three books. b. A person who has thrice kindled the Nāciketa-fire. c. A person who has studied the Anuvāka, called Virajas. Caturmedha may also mean 'one who has performed the four sacrifices' enumerated above.
