+++
title = "Adhyāya III, Kaṇḍikā 7"

+++
## 01
1. If the sun sets while he is sleeping without being sick, he should spend the rest of the night keeping silence, without sitting down, and should worship the sun (when it rises) with the five (verses), 'The light, O sun, by which thou destroyest darkness' (Rig-veda X, 37, 4 seq.).

## 02
2 [^1] . If (the sun) rises (while he is sleeping without being sick), being fatigued without having done any work, or having done work that is not becoming, he should keep silence, &c., as before, and perform his worship (to the sun) with the following four (verses, Rig-veda X, 37, 9 seq.).

## 03
3 [^2] . Invested with the sacrificial cord, constantly fulfilling the prescribed duties regarding the use of water, he should perform the Sandhyā (or twilight devotion), observing silence.

## 04
4. In the evening he should, turning his face to the north-west, to the region between the chief (west) point and the intermediate (north-western) point (of the horizon), murmur the Sāvitrī, (beginning) when the sun is half set, until the stars appear.

## 05
5. In the same way in the morning - 

## 06
6. Standing, with his face turned to the east, until the disk (of the sun) appears.

## 07
7. If a dove flies against his house or towards it, he should sacrifice with (the hymn), 'O gods, the dove' (Rig-veda X, 165), verse by verse, or should murmur (that hymn).

## 08
8. 'We have thee, O Lord of the path' (Rig-veda VI, 53) - if he is going out for doing some business.

## 09
9 [^3] . 'Bring us together, Pūṣan, with a knowing one' (Rig-Veda VI, 54) - if he wishes to find something lost, or if he has strayed.

## 10
10. 'Journey over the ways, Pūṣan' (Rig-veda I, 42) - if he is going out on a long or dangerous way.



[^1]:  7, 2. Perhaps we should correct the text, akarmaśrāntam anabhirūpeṇa karmaṇā vā vāgyata iti, &c.

[^2]:  3 seq. See Śāṅkhāyana-Gṛhya II, 9. There the same word anvaṣṭamadeśa occurs.

[^3]:  Mūlha may either mean, 'having lost his way,' or 'bewildered in his mind.' Nārāyaṇa prefers the latter explanation ('prajñāhīnaḥ').