+++
title = "Adhyāya III, Kaṇḍikā 12"

+++
## 01
1. When a battle is beginning, (the royal Purohita) should cause the king to put on his armour (in the following way).

## 02
2 [^1] . (The Purohita) stations himself to the west of (the king's) chariot with (the hymn?), 'I have brought thee hither; be here' (Rig-veda X, 173).

## 03
3. With (the verse), 'Like a thunder-cloud is his countenance' (Rig-veda VI, 75, 1), he should tender the coat of mail to him.

## 04
4. With the following (verse) the bow.

## 05
5. The following (verse) he should cause him to repeat.

## 06
6. He should murmur himself the fourth.

## 07
7. With the fifth he should tender the quiver to him.

## 08
8. When (the king) starts, the sixth.

## 09
9. The seventh (he recites) over the horses.

## 10
10. The eighth he should cause (the king) to repeat while looking at the arrows;

## 11
11. (The verse), 'Like a serpent it encircles the arm with its windings' (Rig-veda VI, 75, 14), when he ties to his arm the leather (by which the arm is protected against the bow-string).

## 12
12 [^2] . He then mounts up to (the king on his chariot), while he is driving, and causes him to repeat the Abhīvarta hymn (Rig-veda X, 174) and the two verses, 'He who, Mitra and Varuṇa' (Rig-veda VIII, 101, 3 seq.).

## 13
13 [^3] . He then should look at him with the Apratiratha, Śāsa, and Sauparṇa hymns.

## 14
14 [^4] . The Sauparṇa is (the hymn), 'May the streams of honey and ghee flow forwards.'

## 15
15. (The king) should drive (in his chariot successively) to all quarters (of the horizon).

## 16
16. He should commence the battle in the line of battle invented by Āditya or by Uśanas.

## 17
17 [^5] . He should touch the drum with the three verses, 'Fill earth and heaven with thy roar' (Rig-veda VI, 47, 29 seqq.).

## 18
18. With (the verse), 'Shot off fall down' (Rig-veda VI, 75, 16), he should shoot off the arrows.

## 19
19 [^6] . 'Where the arrows fly' (l.l. v. 17) - this (verse) he should murmur while they are fighting.

## 20
20. Or he should teach (the king the texts mentioned). Or he should teach (the king).

End of the Third Adhyāya.



[^1]:  12, 2. According to Nārāyaṇa the Pratīka here signifies not the verse, but the whole hymn, though a whole Pāda is given (comp. Śrauta-sūtra I, 1, 17).

[^2]:  The Abhīvarta hymn begins with the word abhīvartena, and is ascribed to Abhīvarta Āṅgirasa.

[^3]:  The Apratiratha hymn is Rig-veda X, 103 (ascribed to Apratiratha Aindra); the Śāsa, X, 152 (ascribed to Sāsa Bhāradvāja). On the Sauparṇa, see the next Sūtra.

[^4]:  This hymn is not found in any Vedic Saṃhitā, as far s I know, nor does it occur in the Suparṇādhyāya. I have followed Prof. Stenzler's conjecture pra dhārā yantu instead of pradhārayantu, which is confirmed by Sāyaṇa's note on Aitareya Brāhmaṇa VI, 25, 7; VIII, 10, 4 (pp. 365, 399 ed. Aufrecht).

[^5]:  17, 18. According to Nārāyaṇa the subject is the king.

[^6]:  Here the subject is the Purohita.