+++
title = "02"

+++
Old discusses this vs. at some length and disputes the cows as subject. The problems he sees are that 1) it makes more sense for the soma drops to run than the cows (though he admits that there are some undoubted passages with the latter); 2) the shared verb would more naturally have the same subject than diff. subjects (this is not a stylistic given in soma hymns, where substances swap identities all the time); 3) the part. punānā́ḥ ‘being purified’ is better applied to soma drops than cows (though again he recognizes at least one passage in which the part. is so used). On the basis of these arguments he suggests that gā́vaḥ here should be interpr. as accusative rather than as the nominative it overwhelming is, with abhí gā́vaḥ substituted for abhí gā́ḥ on metrical grounds and the soma drops again the subj. This seems both uncharacteristic and unworthy of Oldenberg.

Positing “metrical” motivation for RVic anomalies is rarely successful, because the poets are flexible enough to avoid situations where they would be forced to use the wrong grammatical form because of meter. Moreover, the construction of the a-pādas of the two vss. -- PREVERB PL.NOUN adhanviṣuḥ -- imposes the subject role on the second noun (gā́vaḥ, 2a), which is in the same position as sómāsaḥ in 1a. The only of his arguments that seems at all worth considering is the one about punānā́ḥ, though given the tendency to identify the substances, esp. the liquid substances, in the soma ritual with each other, I do not find it particularly cogent -- and as Old himself points out, c could be a separate clause with the soma drops supplied as subj. there. (Another possible argument, not brought up by Old, is that this is the only vs. in the hymn where soma [sg. or pl.] is not the subject, but I do not think that is strong enough to contravene the grammar.) He cites another possible ex. of acc. gā́vaḥ, in VIII.41.6, where the form is easily interpr. as nom. (see comm. ad loc.). Re follows Old’s interpr; Ge does not, though in his n. 2b he suggests that the poet meant the soma drops as subject, but reversed the construction (“… er hat aber die Konstruktion umgekehrt,” whatever he means by that).

