+++
title = "12"

+++
Most tr. take Mitra and Varuṇa as the objects of dhā́yase: approx. “Agni is for the suckling of Mitra and Varuṇa.” But Agni is the one more likely in need of suckling (that is, feeding the fire); cf., e.g., II.5.7. In particular, in the next hymn, I.95.1, Agni is the object of the transitive/causative dhāpayete. I therefore take the gen. mitrásya váruṇasya as dependent on héḷaḥ in b, parallel to marútāṃ. héḷa(s)- is characteristic of Varuṇa (cf. I.24.14, VII.84.2; in VII.62.4 Mitra is included).

avayātā́m is the problem in the second pāda. Most tr. take it as a 3rd sg.

imperative (e.g., Re “qu’il exorcise”), but if so, it must be a middle root pres.

imperative, and there are no middle forms to this root √yā (as opposed to √yā ‘implore’). There is also the problem that the form should not be accented on the stem but on the preverb (*áva yātām; see Ge n. 12b). Lub appears to take it as a gen. pl. of the act. part. to the root pres., but in the absence of a tr. it is hard to know how he would interpret it in context. Best to follow Old (who follows BR) in emending to

*avayātā́, the nom. sg. agent noun. Re is tempted by this reading, save for the fact
that with the acc. complement héḷaḥ we should expect the accent ávayātā. However, the “rule” about the case of complements to agent nouns is broken so often that this objection is not cogent. The final -m could have been acquired from the following marútām (so Old), and since √yā ‘drive’ is a characteristic Marut verb and a genuine example of the gen. pl. part. yātā́m is used of the Maruts in the refrain V.55.1-9, it may have been rhetorically natural to transform the agent noun into this participle.

