+++
title = "001"

+++
1 (621) Indra (1–29), Dānastuti of Āsaṅga (30–33),
Āsaṅga (34)
Pragātha Kāṇva (formerly Pragātha Ghaura, brother and adoptive son of Kaṇva)  (1–2), Medātithi Kāṇva and Medhyātithi (3–29), Āsaṅga Plāyogi (30–33), Śaśvatī Āṅgirasī, wife of Āsaṅga (34)
34 verses: br̥hatī, except satobr̥hatī 2–4, triṣṭubh 33–34
The structure of this hymn is metrically complex; indeed Oldenberg despairs of it.  It begins with two pragāthas (vss. 1–4, br̥hatī alternating with satobr̥hatī) and ends  with two triṣṭubhs (vss. 33–34). In between are twenty-eight br̥hatī verses, whose  organization is unclear. Oldenberg is inclined to assume an overall tr̥ca structure,  which has been disturbed—and indeed some of whose verses have been lost, as he  believes. Geldner, on the other hand, sees paired verses (continuing the pragāthas  of 1–4) in verses 5–20, tr̥cas in verses 21–29 and the dānastuti (vss. 30–33), with the  final verse (34) falling outside these structures. It is also important to note that this  hymn violates one of the principles of arrangement in the VIIIth Maṇḍala, whereby  within each poet’s collection all hymns to the same deity are grouped together in  order of descending number of verses: our VIII.1 has thirty-four verses, whereas VIII.2, also to Indra, has forty-two. This discrepancy is one of the pieces of evi dence that led Oldenberg to suggest that some verses had been lost in VIII.1. In any case the metrical particulars do not help in discerning the thematic struc ture. The one indisputable fact is that the last four verses (30–34) stand apart from  the rest of the hymn: verses 30–33 form a dānastuti, and the striking final verse (34)  belongs to the same level of colloquial discourse as the three immediately preceding  verses and may in fact be part of the dānastuti (see below). The rest of the hymn  is devoted to Indra, but there is very little sustained praise of the god and almost  no mythology (apart from a few glancing references in vss. 11 and 28). Most of the  Indra portion falls roughly into the genres of “journey” hymn and invitation to  the soma sacrifice, but as often in Indra hymns there is concern that Indra will go  elsewhere for his soma. The first ten verses develop this theme, but with somewhat  slangy language (e.g., “having it both ways,” vs. 2; “keep crisscrossing,” vs. 4) and  with an intimate and almost teasing approach to the god, as when the poet in verse  5 promises that he won’t “hand over” Indra even in return for a great sum. But the  anxiety that Indra will pass by his sacrifice is clear, especially in verses 3–4, 7; this  theme recurs in verses 13–16, and, even in the following verses devoted to the soma  preparation and the god’s response (17–22), in verse 20 the poet expresses his fear  that he might anger Indra with his importunings. The themes of the journey and the  invitation to soma are repeated once more in verses 23–27, and verse 27 ends with  a strong affirmation that Indra will come to our sacrifice, thus ending the repeated  doubts expressed earlier in the hymn. Two more verses (28–29), paired by their  repeated fronted pronouns, bring the Indra part of the hymn to a close. Thus the hymn keeps circling around certain topics, while other common fea tures of Indra hymns such as mythological references are absent; nonetheless, there  is little in the way of formal structure or organized presentation. Moreover, the  striking turns of phrase found in the earlier parts of the hymn are less frequent  in the later parts, with one exception: verse 12. This baffling verse is found also in  the Atharvaveda in the wedding hymn (AVŚ XIV.2.47). It seems to depict Indra as  a wondrous physician, in most interpretations: without even touching it he sticks  together a breach, perhaps a wound, which was perhaps made by a missile, before  the missile, if that’s what it is, pierces through to the collarbones. The translation  given here is provisional, and it is not at all clear to us why the verse is found in this  hymn or what it really refers to.
The dānastuti (vss. 30–33) is notable for a number of reasons, not least that it  mentions several different patrons. The “praises of the gift” are characteristically  obliquely expressed. But the oddest verse in the hymn, and indeed one of the oddest  verses in the R̥gveda, is the final one, verse 34. In it a woman (identified as Śaśvatī by  the Anukramaṇī, but we prefer to take that word as an attributive adjective) expresses  happy surprise at the sight of the penis of an unidentified man. There is no context  for this vignette of sexual encounter with its snatch of provocative direct speech. The  later tradition (Śāṅkhāyana Śrauta Sūtra XVI.11.17, Br̥haddevatā VI.41) consid ers the female to be the wife of Āsaṅga, the patron mentioned in the immediately

preceding verse (33), who had become a woman but was turned back into a man  thanks (according to the Br̥haddevatā) to the poet Medhyātithi. But this explanation  seems a desperate makeshift and the complex gender switching entirely invented. It  seems more likely that the verse belongs to the dānastuti, and in an even more oblique  expression than those that precede it, it “praises the gift” of a woman to the poet  (women are often mentioned as part of the poet’s spoils: see the final verse of the  next hymn, VIII.2.42) by alluding to the enthusiastic response of his new prize to his  sexual advances. (The poet thereby also obliquely praises his own equipment.)
## 1
Don’t praise anything else! Comrades, don’t do yourselves harm.
Praise only Indra the bull when (the soma) is pressed, and right now
pronounce your solemn recitations—
## 2
Him, rumbling loudly like a bull, unaging, conquering territory as if  (conquering) cow(s);
making both: division by hate and unions by love—having it both ways,  the most munificent one.
## 3
For even though these peoples now, every man for himself, call upon you  for help,
let it be our sacred formulation, Indra, that becomes your strengthening  now and throughout all days.
## 4
O bounteous one, the poetic inspirations, those attentive to poetic  inspiration—the ones belonging to the stranger (and those belonging)  to (our) peoples—keep crisscrossing each other.
Hop to! Bring here (to be) nearest a prize of many forms, for help.
## 5
Not even for a great exchange gift would I hand you over, you possessor  of the stone,
not for a thousand, not for ten thousand, you possessor of the mace, not  for a hundred, you of a hundred rewards.
## 6
You are better for me, Indra, than a father and than a brother who  benefits not.
You and a mother seem to me to be alike, o you who are good for goods  and largesse.
## 7
Where have you gone? Where are you? For surely your mind is in many  places.
Are you on the rise?—you fighter, creator of tumult, cleaver of
strongholds. They have sung forth their songs.
## 8
Chant forth a song to him who cleaves strongholds for his favorite— (it is songs) because of which the mace-wielder will travel to sit upon the  ritual grass of Kāṇva and split fortresses.
## 9
Those of yours which bring ten cows, which bring a hundred, a
thousand,
those horses of yours which are swift-running bulls, with these come  swiftly to us. 10. Today I summon the juice-yielding (cow), pulsing with excitement from  the songs,
Indra, the good milker, the lead milk-cow, the broad-streamed
refreshment, who gets it right.
## 11
When he gave a push to Etaśa, (the steed) of the Sun, and to the two  far-wandering winged (steeds) of the Wind,
he of a hundred resolves conveyed Kutsa, the son of Arjuna. He crept  up on the Gandharva, who was not to be laid low.
## 12
He [=Indra] who, even without a bandage, before (the missile) drills  into the collarbones,
joins together the join—he, the bounteous one with many goods: he  makes what has gone awry right again.
## 13
May we not be like outsiders, like foreigners to you, Indra.
Like trees left behind (by woodcutters), we have considered ourselves  poor at burning, you possessor of the stone.
## 14
Indeed we have considered ourselves neither swift nor strong, you  Vr̥tra-smasher.
But in an instant, through your great generosity, o champion, we could  (again) take delight in your praise.
## 15
If he will listen to my praise, let our (soma-)drops invigorate Indra, when they have run swift across the filter, they that strengthen the son  of Tugra [=Bhujyu].
## 16
Come here today to the joint praise from your favorite and comrade. Let the invitatory praise of the bounteous ones help you forward. Then  I am eager for good praise for you.
## 17
Once you (priests) have pressed the soma with the stones, rinse it in the  waters.
The superior men, garbing (it) in cows [=milk] as if in garments, will  milk (it) out from the belly.
## 18
(Coming) then from earth or then from heaven, from the lofty realm  of light,
by this my song become strong in your own body. Bring created things  to fullness, o you of strong resolve.
## 19
For Indra press well the most invigorating soma worthy to be chosen. The potent one [=Indra] will swell him who is spurred on, like a
prize-seeking (horse), by every insight.
## 20
I, always begging you with my song—with the gush [?] of soma
let me not
anger you, frenzied like a wild beast, at the soma-pressings. Who will  not beg his master?
## 21
(Begging) the mighty one with his mighty power for his exhilaration  roused by the exhilarating drink,
the one triumphant over all when roused to exhilaration—for in his
exhilaration he always gives to us.1024 VIII.1
## 22
In his treasury are many desirable things. The god (will grant them) to  the pious mortal;
he will grant to him who presses and to him who praises—(the god)  who is welcomed by all, praised by the stranger.
## 23
Drive here, Indra—find your invigoration (here)—together with your  bright bounty, o god.
Fill your belly, like a lake, broad and fat with soma juices drunk in  common.
## 24
Here let a thousand, here let a hundred, yoked to a golden chariot— the long-maned fallow bays, yoked by a sacred formulation—convey  you to drink the soma, o Indra.
## 25
Here let the two fallow bays (yoked) to the golden chariot, those with  peacock tails
and white backs, convey you to drink of the honey, of the
strengthening stalk.
## 26
Drink of this pressed (soma), you who long for songs, like the first  drinker [=Vāyu].
This pressed drink of the juicy, thoroughly prepared (soma), cherished  for invigoration, acts the lord.
## 27
He who is unique through his wondrous skill, the great and mighty one  is dominant through his commandments.
The fair-lipped one will come—he will not stay away, he will come here.  He will not avoid our call.
## 28
You crushed completely the roving fortress of Śuṣṇa with your deadly  weapons.
You followed the light, (and shall) once again, when, Indra, you will  become the one to be summoned.
## 29
Mine are the praises when the sun has risen, mine at the day’s midday, mine in the evening at the border of night, that have turned you here, o  good one.
## 30
Praise (them)! Just praise (them)! They are the most bounteous of  bounty among your bounteous ones:
Ninditāśva, Prapathin, and Paramajyā, o Medhyātithi.
## 31
When with trust in the winning horses I mount on the chariot, of the valuable goods what will stand out is the livestock coming  from Yadu.
## 32
Who has bounteously given two silvery (horses) to me, together with a  golden hide,
let him be dominant over all auspicious things—Svanadratha, (son of)  Āsaṅga.
## 33
Then Āsaṅga, the son of Playoga, will give more than others, o Agni, by  ten thousand.
Then for me ten gleaming bullocks emerged, like reeds from a pond. 34. His thick (member) has become visible in front along its length—a  boneless thigh hanging down.
His woman, ever ready, having caught sight of it, says, “My lord, you’re  bringing (me) an excellent treat!”