+++
title = "002"

+++
2 (622) Indra (1–40), Vibhindu’s Dānastuti (41–42)
Medhātithi Kāṇva and Priyamedha Āṅgirasa (1–40), Medhātithi Kāṇva (41–42) 42 verses: gāyatrī, except anuṣṭubh 28, arranged in trcas. ̥
As noted above, this hymn has considerably more verses than the preceding one,  and is therefore apparently out of sequence. The discrepancy in length between  the two hymns is one reason Oldenberg suggests that VIII.1 may have lost verses in  transmission. (See the introduction to the preceding hymn.)
As indicated by the Anukramaṇī, the majority of the hymn is devoted to Indra, with  the final verses a dānastuti; however, despite the Anukramaṇī’s division, the dānastuti  must begin with verse 40, not 41, both because of the tr̥ca division and on grounds  of content and tone. In the Indra portion the focus remains almost exclusively on the  preparation of soma in its various forms, and the hope that Indra will come to our  sacrifice, drink of our soma, and reward us. As often in such hymns, there is a journey  component (esp. vss. 19, 26–28), and underlying the calls to Indra to journey to our  sacrifice is the worry that Indra will stay away from our sacrifice because of anger or  the appeals of other sacrificers (vss. 5–6, 19–20). There are also some slight indications  that the hymn is concerned with a ritual innovation being introduced in some of the  R̥gvedic clans, the Third Pressing, which takes place in the evening and involves soma  mixed with milk. There are two occurrences of the word ā́śir “milk-mixture” (vss. 10,  11; see also 9b [ā́śir is also found twice in VIII.31, which also seems to contain refer ences to Third Pressing]), and verse 18 seems to imply that the gods themselves are not  satisfied with a soma sacrifice that ends with the Midday Pressing. The emphasis on  the number three (esp. vss. 7–9, 21) may also support this interpretation, as may the  hope expressed that Indra will not spend his evening away from us (vs. 20).
Aside from the thematic unity of some of the tr̥cas (e.g., vss. 7–9 on the three  types of soma), this long first section of the hymn has little apparent structure, and  it is also notable for its lack of mythological reference (beyond a few token men tions of Vr̥tra, vss. 26, 31, 36). But throughout this section there are unusual simi les (e.g., vss. 6, 12, 17, 19, 20) and turns of phrase, including some untranslatable  grammatical and lexical puns (as in vs. 3). The loose texture and the lightness and  transparency of the meter also help to make it an appealing piece.
The dānastuti (vss. 40–42) is, as often, hard to interpret. In verse 40 the actor  seems still to be Indra, who in the guise of a ram had some sort of interaction with  Medhyātithi: the language here is unclear, and although there are various treatments  of Medhātithi (sic) and Indra as ram in the Brāhmaṇa literature, these seem desper
ate attempts to make sense of the fleeting and mysterious reference here. Though it

appears to be Indra who is addressed in a subordinate clause in the 2nd person in  verse 40, the 2nd person reference has shifted in verse 41 to Vibindhu, apparently  the human patron. Perhaps Indra’s generosity is being superimposed on this human  patron. The final verse, 42, like the final verse of the dānastuti in VIII.1 (vs. 34), con
cludes the hymn with a sexual innuendo: two “daughters of joy” (a phrase that goes  neatly into French as filles de joie “prostitutes”) have also been given to the poet.  These may indeed be two women, but since they are called “milk-strong,” it is quite  possible that the poet is referring to the two breasts of one woman. If so, this verse  responds directly to VIII.1.34, where the woman of the poet praises his member, and  recalls IV.32.22-24, with a likewise disguised reference to the breasts of a woman  given to the poet in payment for his verse.
## 1
This pressed stalk, o good one—drink your belly well full—
have we given to you, o you who bring no threat.
## 2
Rinsed by men, pressed by stones, purified by the sheep’s fleece,
washed like a horse in the rivers—
## 3
Preparing it with cows [=milk], we have made it sweet for you, like  barley (enjoyed) by cows.
Indra, (we have made) you (to be) at this joint revelry.
## 4
It’s just Indra who is the lone drinker of soma, Indra the lifelong  drinker of the pressings
among gods and mortals,
## 5
Whom neither the clear [=unmixed] nor the poorly mixed nor the  (juices) that are sharp
keep away—him of broad extent whose heart is good—
## 6
When those other than us go hunting him with cows, like
(self-)choosing women hunting (husbands),
and creep up on him with their milk-cows.
## 7
Let the three somas be pressed for the god Indra,
for the soma-drinker in (our) own dwelling.
## 8
Three buckets drip and three cups are well filled
at the same presentation.
## 9
You are clear, outstanding among many; (and you are) mixed with milk  in the middle;
and (you, mixed) with curd, (are) the most invigorating for the champion.
## 10
These soma-drinks are yours, Indra, the sharp ones pressed among us. The clear ones beg for the milk mixture.
## 11
Prepare these: the milk mixture, the offering cake, and this soma here,  o Indra,
for I hear that you are endowed with riches.
## 12
When they have been drunk, they fight each other within the heart, like  those badly intoxicated on liquor.
Like the naked in the cold they stay awake. 13. Rich indeed should be the praiser of a rich benefactor like you,
and far(-famed) indeed (the praiser) of a famous one, o possessor of  the fallow bays.
## 14
Never does the stranger pay attention to a solemn speech being recited  if it comes from a man without cattle,
nor to a song being sung.
## 15
Don’t hand us over to a taunter, Indra, nor to one who vaunts  himself.
Do your best (for us), able one, with your abilities.
## 16
We have just this aim: as comrades devoted to you, Indra,
the Kaṇvas sing to you with their solemn words.
## 17
I express admiration at nothing else, mace-bearer. Like workmen at  their labor,
it’s just your praise song to which I pay attention.
## 18
The gods seek a presser. They are not eager for sleep.
Tireless, they go to exhilaration.
## 19
Drive forth here with prizes. Stop being angry at us,
like a great man with a young wife.
## 20
Let him not (be) filled with evil rage. Will he spend his evening at a  distance from us
like a son-in-law down on his luck?
## 21
For we know the much-giving benevolence of him,
the hero,
and the thoughts of him who was born in the three.
## 22
Pour here the Kaṇvas’ (soma). We know no one more glorious than him  swelling with strength,
than him who has a hundred forms of help.
## 23
With the most superior (might), o presser, bring the soma to Indra, to  the able hero.
He will drink for manly strength—
## 24
He who among the unwavering is the best at finding the prize that  brings horses for the singers,
that brings cattle for the praisers.
## 25
Pressers, rinse the soma that is ever to be admired for the one to be  exhilarated,
for the hero, the champion.
## 26
The Vr̥tra-smasher, the drinker of the pressed (soma) will come. Not far  from us
will he stop, the one with a hundred forms of help.
## 27
Here, just here will his two capable fallow bays, yoked by the sacred  formulation, carry our comrade,
famed through songs, longing for songs.

## 28
The soma juices are sweet: drive here! The soma juices are
prepared: drive here—
o you with (lovely) lips, accompanied by the seers, possessed of  ability—on your own to the landing site, to the joint revelry.
## 29
The praises that strengthen you for great generosity and manly action, o Indra, strengthening (you) as the decisive victor,
## 30
And the songs for you, o you whose vehicle is song, and the solemn  words—these are for you—
those which have in every way deployed their powers.
## 31
Just so the powerfully ranging one with mace in hand is the only one to  distribute the prizes of victory—indestructible from of old.
## 32
He is the smasher of Vr̥tra with his right (hand)—the many times  much-called-upon Indra,
the great one with great powers,
## 33
In whom are all the settled domains and both exploits and expanses. The (soma) invigorating for the bounteous (Indra) (follows) along.
## 34
He has done these things—Indra, who is famed beyond all things as the giver of prizes to the bounteous (patrons).
## 35
Even from behind he brings to the fore the cattle-seeking chariot that  he helps,
for he is the powerful conveyor of goods.
## 36
He is the winner as inspired poet and with his steeds, the smasher of  Vr̥tra, the champion with his superior men,
the real helper of him who does honor.
## 37
Sacrifice to him, o Priyamedhas, with fully focused mind—to Indra, whose exhilaration becomes real through the soma juices.
## 38
To the lord of the settlement whose fame is from song, whose desire is  fame, who has much in himself,
to the prize-winner—sing, Kaṇvas!
## 39
Who as able comrade gave the cows, even though (they were) without  tracks, to the superior men
who fixed their desire in him.
## 40
O possessor of the stone—him whose insights are to the point,  Medhyātithi Kāṇva,
since you, having become a ram, led (him) to (goods)—
## 41
Do your best for him, o Vibhindu, giving him four ten thousands and eight thousands beyond.
## 42
And these two dear little ones of mine, the milk-strong daughters of joy, has he bounteously given to become my wives.