+++
title = "003"

+++
3 (623) Indra (1–20), Pākasthāman Kaurayāṇa’s Dānastuti  (21–24)
Medhyātithi Kāṇva
24 verses: br̥hatī alternating with satobr̥hatī, 1–20, arranged in pragāthas, anuṣṭubh  12, gāyatrī 22–23, br̥hatī 24
Like the previous two hymns, this one consists of a long praise of Indra (vss. 1–20)  followed by a short dānastuti (21–24). The Indra portion is arranged in stan dard pragāthas, while the dānastuti is metrically more varied. The verse pairs of  the pragāthas are for the most part internally unified, but like many of the longer  hymns in VIII there is not much apparent structure in the hymn as a whole. There  are, however, several recurrent themes:  the greatness (mahimán) and vast power  (śávas) of Indra (e.g., vss. 4, 6); the gods and poets who have previously celebrated  Indra and have been helped by him (e.g., vss. 7–9, 16); and the sheer noise made  by Indra’s praisers (e.g., vss. 3, 7, 16, 18). In the context of all this previous poetic  activity, verses 13 and 14 raise anxious questions about what constitutes the proper  topic of praise poetry and how to configure these praises anew, the perennial prob
lem of the R̥gvedic bard.
The dānastuti is far easier to interpret than those of the previous two  hymns: the patron Pākasthāman is celebrated for his gift of a particularly fine  sorrel horse, given also by Indra and the Maruts. The first half of the last verse  (24) seems to contain an adage, or adapted piece of folk wisdom, as a foil to  further praise of the patron in the second half of the verse. The verse itself has  a slight Pindaric ring.
## 1
Drink of the sap-filled pressed (soma). Reach exhilaration from our  (soma) accompanied by cows, Indra.
Become a friend, a feasting companion, for our strengthening. Let your  insights help us.
## 2
We would be in the good favor of you, the prizewinner. Do not lay us  low before hostility.
Help us with your conspicuous powers to prevail. Keep us in your good  thoughts.
## 3
Let these make you strong, you of many goods—the songs which  are mine.
Pure-colored, gleaming, attentive to poetic inspiration, they have cried  out to (you) with their praises.
## 4
This one, created with might by a thousand seers, spreads wide like  the sea.
(When) realized, his greatness, his vast power is sung at sacrifices in the  realm of the inspired poet.

## 5
It is just Indra for the sake of the divine assemblage, Indra as the  ceremony advances,
Indra whom we call upon when we are winning at the encounter— Indra, in order to gain the stake.
## 6
Indra by his greatness spread the two worlds and his vast power; Indra  made the sun shine.
Within Indra are all beings held and within Indra the pressed drops.
## 7
To you, for you to drink first, o Indra, with their praises the Āyus and the R̥bhus united sounded together, and the Rudras sang (to you) as the  foremost.
## 8
Indra increased his own bullish vast power in the exhilaration of the  pressed (soma) in the company of Viṣṇu.
Today the Āyus praise his greatness as in the earlier way.
## 9
I beg you for a mass of good heroes and for the sacred formulation to  be first in your thought.
That with which, when the stake was set, (you were there) for the Yatis  and for Bhr̥gu, with which you helped Praskaṇva,
## 10
With which you sent the great waters surging to the sea, that is your  bullish vast power, Indra.
In a single day that greatness of his cannot be fully attained, toward  which the battle-cry has roared.
## 11
Muster your ability for us, Indra, when I beg you for wealth and a mass  of good heroes.
Muster your ability for the one striving to first win the prize. Muster  your ability for the praise song, foremost one.
## 12
Muster your ability for us since you helped Paura (and help) the  insights of this one striving to win, Indra.
Muster your ability just as you furthered Ruśama, Śyāvaka, and Kr̥pa  possessing solar glory, Indra.
## 13
What among the unshakable things should a powerful mortal  sing anew?
For, (even though) singing the sun, they have not reached his greatness,  his Indrian power.
## 14
Praising what will they be acting according to truth among the gods?  Which inspired poet will be lauded as a seer?
When will you come to the call of the man who presses, o bounteous  Indra, when (to that) of the man who praises?
## 15
These most honeyed songs and praises rise up—
entirely victorious, gaining the stake, possessing imperishable help,  competing for the prize like chariots. 16. The Kaṇvas—like the Bhr̥gus, (themselves) like suns—have attained  everything conceivable.
Magnifying Indra with praises, the Āyus and Priyamedhas sounded.
## 17
Yoke up your pair of fallow bays, o Indra, best smiter of obstacles,  from out of the far distance,
(then,) o bounteous one, turned our way, come here, a mighty one with  lofty (horses), to drink the soma.
## 18
For these bards, inspired poets, have bellowed for you for the winning  of wisdom with their insight.
You, o bounteous Indra longing for songs—like a tracker listen to our call.
## 19
You kicked Vr̥tra out from the lofty steppes, Indra.
You drove (the cows) of Arbuda and the tricky Mr̥gaya out, out the
cows of Parvata.
## 20
The fires shone out, out the sun, out the soma, the Indrian sap.
You blew the great serpent out from the midspace: that manly act did  you perform, Indra.
## 21
The one that Indra and the Maruts, that Pākasthāman, the son of  Kurayāṇa, gave me—
the most beautiful of all in body, like the one that runs in heaven
[=sun]—
## 22
(That) sorrel has Pākasthāman given me,
—good at the yoke-pole, filling his girthband, an awakener of wealth, 23. Alongside which the other ten draft-horses draw the yoke-pole
home, like birds the son of Tugra.
## 24
Food is the lifebreath, garments the body, and anointment is the giver  of strength.
But as the fourth I have proclaimed Pākasthāman, the nurturing giver  of the sorrel.