+++
title = "004"

+++
4 (624) Indra (1–14), Indra or Pūsan (15–18), Kurun ̣ ̇ga’s  Dānastuti (19–21)
Devātithi Kāṇva
21 verses:  br̥hatī alternating with satobr̥hatī, arranged in pragāthas, except  puraüṣṇih 21.
Like the previous hymn, this one is arranged in pragāthas. However, there is less inter nal cohesion in the verse pairs, but more discernible structure in their arrangement in  the hymn. As noted in the Anukramaṇī the hymn falls into three major sections: the  longest (vss. 1–14) devoted to Indra, the next (vss. 15–18) to Pūṣan, and the last (vss.  19–21) a dānastuti. The Indra portion opens with a pragātha (vss. 1–2) listing many

possible sacrificers that Indra might visit, and urging him to come to the Kaṇvas here.  The next four pragāthas (vss. 3–10) form a ring composition, with verses 3/4 and 9/10  matched to each other: Indra as a thirsty animal coming to drink (3a, 10a) and his  assumption of supreme power (4d, 10d). The remaining two pragāthas in this section  (vss. 11–14) command the Adhvaryus to press soma for Indra. The actual content of  the Indra section is conventional: praise of his powers and his help for mortals, invita
tions to journey here and drink the soma, with the invitation becoming more insistent  toward the end. There are almost no mythological references (though the enigmatic  first pāda of 8 seems to refer to the same event as III.32.11, where Indra wears the  earth on his hip), and the usual pleas for gifts are essentially absent, replaced by indi
rection: descriptions of pious men who benefit from Indra.
The Pūṣan section (though the Anukramaṇī offers a choice of Indra or Pūṣan  as the deity, it is clearly Pūṣan) makes the requests for gifts overt, and it serves as a  transition to the dānastuti proper. The penultimate verse of the Pūṣan section (17)  in fact seems to refer to a different Kaṇva poet, Pajra Sāman (see VIII.6.47), who  has his own gifts to praise—as our poet turns to his own in verse 18, apparently  sequestering his share of the cattle in a different pasture. The dānastuti (vss. 19–21)  is fairly straightforward in its first two verses, but the final verse (21) is entirely  opaque, at least to these translators.
## 1
When, Indra, you are being called forward or back, up or down, by men, you yourself, propelled by men, are many times in the company of the  descendants of Anu, are in the company of Turvaśa, you vaunter.
## 2
Or when, Indra, in the company of Ruma, Ruśama, Syāvaka, or Kr̥pa,  you bring yourself to exhilaration,
the Kaṇvas, whose vehicle is praise, guide you here with their sacred
formulations, Indra. Come here!
## 3
As a thirsty buffalo goes down to a salt-pocket made by water,
come swiftly here to us in friendship [/in the morning], in the evening. In  the company of the Kaṇvas, drink up!
## 4
Let the drops exhilarate you, bounteous Indra, to give largesse to the  presser.
Having stolen the pressed soma, you drank it in a cup. (Then) you
assumed this most superior might.
## 5
He put forward his might with might; he shattered battle fury with  his power.
All who seek battle, vigorous Indra, hold themselves down, like trees,  before you.
## 6
He is accompanied by an ever-battling warrior as if by a thousand— whoever has achieved a praise-invocation for you.
He puts his own son forward with a good twist amid an abundance of  good heroes—(whoever) ritually serves with words of reverence. 7. Might we not fear, might we not grow weary in comradeship with you,  the powerful one.
A great deed of you the bull should be witnessed. Might we see Turvaśa  and Yadu.
## 8
The bull wears (it [=the earth]) on his left hip. His giving is not
resentful.
The milk-cows are infused with the honey of the bees. Come here
swiftly! Run! Drink!
## 9
Your comrade, o Indra, certainly has a horse and chariot, is lovely in  form and rich in cows.
He is always accompanied by the vigor of a swelling portion.
Glittering, he drives to the assembly.
## 10
Like a thirsting antelope, come to the drinking hole. Drink the soma as  you will.
Pissing down day after day, o bounteous one, you have assumed the
most powerful might.
## 11
Adhvaryu, make the soma run: Indra wants to drink.
Now he has yoked his two bullish fallow bays and has come here, the  Vr̥tra-smasher.
## 12
Even he himself considers himself a pious man at whose place you  become sated on soma.
Here is your food, ready for yoking, fully sprinkled: of it—come!
run!—drink.
## 13
Adhvaryus, press the soma for Indra who stands on the chariot.
The stones gaze out upon (the upper surface) of the coppery (soma) as  they press the one belonging to pious ceremonies.
## 14
His two favorites, the bullish fallow bays, will convey Indra to the  coppery (soma) among the industrious (priests).
Let your team, the glory of the ceremony, convey you, facing our way,  right here to our pressings.
## 15
We choose Pūṣan of many goods for yoking.
You able one, invoked by many, you releaser—do your best because of  our insight to thrust out wealth for us.
## 16
Sharpen us like a razor in your hands. Bestow riches, you releaser. In you is that ruddy good [=cattle] easy to find for us (and for) the
mortal whom you urge on.
## 17
I pursue you, Pūṣan, to aim (toward you). I pursue you to praise (you),  glowing one.
I do not pursue (anything) of his—for that is alien, o good one, (and it  is) for Pajra Sāman to praise.1034 VIII.5
## 18
Away (be) the cows toward some (other) pasture, o glowing, immortal  one, (to be) our own legacy.
Become our kindly helper, Pūṣan, most munificent for the winning of  prizes.
## 19
Substantial is the bounty that brings a hundred horses at Kuruṅga’s  rituals of day(break).
At the gifts of the vibrant king, bestowing good fortune, we thought  ourselves to be among the Turvaśas.
## 20
Won through the insights of the prizewinning descendant of Kaṇva,  (won) by the heaven-bound Priyamedhas,
sixty thousand flawless [?] (cows) I drive along, (drive) forth herds of  cows—I the seer.
## 21
Even the trees have found pleasure at my supper-time.
They share in the cow in its profusion; they share in the horse in its
profusion.