+++
title = "005"

+++
5 (625)
Aśvins
Brahmātithi Kāṇva
39 verses: gāyatrī, except br̥hatī 37–38, anuṣṭubh 39, all arranged in trcas ̥
This long hymn (at 39 verses the longest hymn to the Aśvins in the R̥gveda) presents  few difficulties and, correspondingly, few particular pleasures. Many pādas in the  hymn have exact or near counterparts elsewhere.
The hymn begins not with the Aśvins but with the appearance of the (unnamed)  Dawn (vs. 1), as a lead-in to the Aśvins’ early morning journey. Throughout the hymn  the two gods are urged to drive here to our sacrifice, with occasional mentions of the  sacrifices they should pass over on their way to ours (esp. vss. 13, 15). They are also  begged for the usual assortment of wealth in goods and livestock; their “refreshments”  (íṣ) are especially insistently hoped for (see vss. 5, 9, 10, 20, 21, 31, 34, 36). There is  almost no mythological material, little mention of the miraculous rescues that are  the Aśvins’ stock in trade. Brief allusions to two of these exploits are found in verses  22–23, and the bare names of a number of their clients are listed in verses 25–26.
The last three verses (37–39) are a dānastuti praising the gift of one Kaśu, lord  of the Cedis. His previous, fairly modest, gift is mentioned in verse 38, with the  hope that the Aśvins will have the opportunity to see a more magnificent version in  verse 37. And in verse 39 Kaśu is implicitly challenged to make an unparalleled gift,  so that other men will not win greater praise for their generosity.
## 01
When, though being at a distance, she of ruddy breath has brightened as  if right here,
she has stretched out her radiance in all directions. 2. Manfully, o wondrous ones, with your mind-yoked chariot of broad  dimensions
you accompany Dawn, o Aśvins.
## 03
O you rich in prizewinning mares, praise songs have appeared facing  you two.
Like a messenger I shall solemnly proclaim my speech.
## 04
*O Kaṇvas, for us shall I praise the two dear to many, delightful to  many, who bring many good things,
the Aśvins—for their help—
## 05
The most munificent, the best prizewinners, the two lords of beauty  bringing refreshments
who go to the house of the pious man.
## 06
To the pious man who has the gods well on his side (give) good wisdom  that doesn’t doublecross him;
sprinkle his pasture-land with ghee.
## 07
Here to our praise song drive quickly at speed
with your swift falcons, your horses,
## 08
With which you fly around the three far distances, all the luminous  realms of heaven,
and the three nights.
## 09
And refreshments along with cattle and winnings, too, o finders of  the days—
unfasten the paths for us to win (them).
## 10
Convey here to us, o Aśvins, wealth in cattle, in good heroes and good  chariots,
and refreshments along with horses.
## 11
Having grown strong, o lords of beauty, you wondrous ones whose  tracks are golden,
drink the somian honey.
## 12
O you rich in prizewinning mares, to us and to our bounteous (patrons)  hold out extensive
shelter that cannot be cheated.
## 13
Team up the formulations of the people and come quickly here.
Do not go to the others.
## 14
You, o Aśvins—drink of this dear exhilarating drink,
of the honey bestowed, o holy ones.
## 15
Bring here to us wealth in hundreds and thousands,
consisting of much livestock, nourishing all.
## 16
Even though in many places men of inspired thought vie with (other)  cantors in invoking you two—
o men, o Aśvins, come here.

## 17
The people, provided with twisted ritual grass and oblations, making fit  preparations,
call upon you two, o Aśvins.
## 18
Today let this praise song of ours, which best conveys you nearest, be for you two, o Aśvins.
## 19
The skin-bag of honey that was set here in your chariot-rut, drink from it, o Aśvins.
## 20
O you rich in prizewinning mares, with it bring weal for our livestock,  our offspring, and our cow,
and refreshments rich in fat.
## 21
And heavenly refreshments and rivers, o finders of the days— like two doors, you will open (these) up for us.
## 22
When did the son of Tugra, abandoned in the sea, do reverence to  you, o men,
so that your chariot would fly with its birds?
## 23
O Nāsatyas, to Kaṇva, (his eyes) pasted shut and in a locked house, over and over you offer your help.
## 24
Drive here with this help, when with our newer good lauds
I call upon you, o you with bullish goods.
## 25
Just as you helped Kaṇva, Priyamedha, Upastuta,
Atri, and Śr̥ñjāra, o Aśvins,
## 26
And just as you (helped) Aṃśu when the stake was to be decided and  Agastya when (it was) cows,
and Sobhari when (it was) victory-prizes,
## 27
For so much favor, or more than that,
do we singers beg you, o Aśvins with bullish goods.
## 28
O Aśvins, the chariot with golden chariot-box and golden reins that touches heaven—since you will mount it—
## 29
Golden your chariot-shaft, golden your chariot-pole and your axle; golden both your wheels—
## 30
With it [=chariot] come here to us even from afar, o you rich in  prize mares,
to this good praise of mine.
## 31
From far away you convey here the many refreshments
of the Dāsa, while consuming them, o immortal Aśvins.
## 32
Drive here to us with brilliance, here with fame, here with wealth,  Aśvins,
you much-gleaming Nāsatyas.
## 33
Let your feathered birds [=horses], frothing at the mouth, convey you here to the man who performs the ceremony well. 34. Your chariot pursuing our song—the (chariot) that rolls along, along  with its refreshment—
its wheel does not ram against it.
## 35
(Drive here) with your golden chariot, with your horses with speedy  forefeet,
o Nāsatyas, who spur on insights.
## 36
You sweeten, as it were, the wakeful wild animal [=soma?], o you of  bullish goods.
Infuse wealth with refreshment for us.
## 37
O Aśvins, may you know of my new winnings—
how Kaśu, the lord of the Cedi, will give a hundred camels, ten
thousand cows.
## 38
He who (previously) bestowed on me a king’s ten (horses?) of golden  appearance—
beneath the feet of the lord of the Cedis are (all) the communities, the  “hide-tanning” men all around.
## 39
Let no one go by this path by which these Cedis go,
lest another man be lauded as a patron who’s a better giver of
abundance.
The following hymn initiates the second group of hymns in VIII, those in which the  seer Vatsa is mentioned (VIII.6–11); see Oldenberg (1888: 211–14).