+++
title = "006"

+++
6 (626)
Indra (1–45), Tirindira Pārsavya’s Da ́ ̄nastuti (46–48)
Vatsa Kāṇva
48 verses: gāyatrī, arranged in trcas ̥
The Vatsa group contains only one hymn to Indra, but at forty-eight verses it is  one of the longest hymns in the entire R̥gveda. It is thus not surprising that the  hymn is not a tightly structured creation, but a fairly loose collection of three-verse  units treating various aspects of Indra. Nonetheless, certain themes are threaded  through the hymn, in particular the Kaṇvas’ role in strengthening Indra through  their poetry. This is strongly articulated in the first tr̥ca (vss. 1–3), in which the poet  Vatsa himself claims this role in verse 1, alongside his ancestral family in verses  2–3. This last verse contains the striking assertion that the Kaṇvas’ praise is their  “familial weapon,” which they “speak”—an image developed in verses 7–8, where  the Kaṇvas’ insights are blazing missiles. In the next tr̥ca (vss. 10–12) the poetic  “I” (presumably Vatsa) speaks of his poetic heritage. The tr̥ca consisting of verses  19–21 implicitly identifies the verbal products of the Kaṇvas with the physical obla tions of the sacrifice. (And pāda 20c contains a particularly opaque simile, whose

meaning we are uncertain of.) Once again, in two adjacent tr̥cas (31–33, 34–36)  the Kaṇvas’ power to strengthen Indra by poetry is celebrated in straightforward  terms. The last tr̥ca before the dānastuti (43–45) begins with another mention of  the Kaṇvas’ activity.
Interspersed among the Kaṇvas’ self-glorifications are tr̥cas of straight praise for  Indra. Tr̥cas 2 (vss. 4–6) and 5–6 (vss. 13–18) celebrate Indra’s might and his victories,  especially over Vr̥tra, and could be taken as examples of the Indra-strengthening  praise-poetry that the Kaṇvas attribute to themselves. The later Indra-oriented  tr̥cas (22–24, 25–27, 37–39, 40–42) are more concerned with the sacrifice, the invita
tion and journey to the soma, and the goods and help the sacrificers hope to obtain  from Indra. In the midst of these is an enigmatic tr̥ca (vss. 28–30), which seems to  suggest a connection between the primordial birth of the god (Indra? Soma?) and  the origins of poetic inspiration.
The hymn ends with a three-verse dānastuti, which, for a change, is far easier to  interpret than the hymn to which it is appended.
## 1
Great Indra, who is like rain-bearing Parjanya in might,
has grown strong through the praises of Vatsa.
## 2
They (are) guiding the offspring of truth [=poem] safely across, when  they bring it forward—the conveyors,
the inspired poets, by the conveyance of truth.
## 3
The Kaṇvas—when by their praises they have made Indra the one who  assures success to their sacrifice,
they are speaking their own familial weapon.
## 4
To his battle fury the clans and all the communities bend down
together,
like the rivers to the sea.
## 5
That might of his flared when Indra rolled up
both worlds together like a hide.
## 6
With his mace of a hundred joints, with the ram, he split apart
the head of raging Vr̥tra.
## 7
These insights (bellow out)—we bellow out—again and again toward  (you) at the forefront of the inspired words,
(the insights that are) missiles, like the blazing of fire—
## 8
Since, though they are hidden, the insights blaze forth by themselves— the Kaṇvas (blaze forth)—in a stream of truth.
## 9
Might we attain to this, Indra: to wealth in cows and horses,
and to a sacred formulation to be first in your thought.
## 10
Because it is just I who have acquired the wisdom of truth from my  father,
I have been (re)born like the sun. 11. I, like Kaṇva, beautify my songs with an age-old thought—
just the one with which Indra acquired his unbridled force.
## 12
(There are those) who have not praised you, Indra, and seers who have  praised you,
but grow strong just (by) my (praise), as one well praised.
## 13
When his battle fury smoked, he, breaking Vr̥tra apart joint by joint, sent the waters to the sea.
## 14
You, Indra, struck your steadfast mace down upon Śuṣṇa the Dasyu, for you, mighty one, are famed as a bull.
## 15
Neither the heavens, nor the midspaces will encompass mace-bearing  Indra with his might,
nor will the earths.
## 16
The one who lay upon the great waters, standing fast against
you, Indra,
that one you jabbed down into their footsteps.
## 17
Who held together in his grasp these two great conjoined worlds, that one, o Indra, you hid with shades of darkness.
## 18
(There are) those Yatis and those Bhr̥gus who have praised you, Indra— but hear just my call, mighty one.
## 19
These dappled ones milk out ghee and the milk mixture for you, Indra, they being swollen full of truth in this way.
## 20
The fecund ones who have made you their infant-by-mouth [=nursling] sur(round you), as the supports (of heaven do) the sun [?].
## 21
It is just you, lord of power, that the Kaṇvas have strengthened with  their recitation,
you that the pressed drops (have strengthened).
## 22
Just under your leadership, o Indra, master of the stones, is the
encomium
and the sacrifice worth tussling over.
## 23
Break out great refreshment for us, like a fortress filled with
cattle, Indra,
and also offspring and abundance of heroes,
## 24
And this abundance of swift horses, Indra, which will shine forth here at the forefront among the Nāhuṣa clans.
## 25
You extend your control over the one whose eye is near to the sun  [=Agni? gold?], as if over a cattle-pen.
When, Indra, you will be gracious to us,
## 26
When, indeed, you display your power and rule over the settled peoples,  o Indra,
great and unbounded in your might,

## 27
Upon you the clans, offering oblations, call for help,
(you who are) of broad expanse through the drops.
## 28
In a remote place of the mountains and at the conjunction of the rivers the inspired poet was born with insight.
## 29
From here, from the heights, watchful, he looks down upon the sea, from where, quivering, he stirs.
## 30
Just after that they see the dawning light of the age-old semen, when it is kindled far beyond heaven.
## 31
The Kaṇvas all strengthen their thought for you, Indra, and your  manliness
and your bullishness, most powerful one.
## 32
Enjoy this good praise of mine, Indra. Promote me,
and strengthen my thought.
## 33
And in seeking a sacred formulation for you, you fully grown  mace-bearer,
as inspired poets we have fashioned (it) in order to live.
## 34
The Kaṇvas have roared, like waters going along a slope;
their winning thought (has roared) to Indra.
## 35
Their recitations have increased Indra, like the rivers the sea, (Indra,) the unaging one to whom the battle fury has been conceded. 36. Drive here to us from afar, with your two beloved fallow bays. Drink this pressed soma, Indra.
## 37
Just you, best smasher of obstacles, do the peoples, when they have  twisted their ritual grass,
call on for the winning of prizes.
## 38
After you (roll) both worlds, as the wheel rolls (after) Etaśa; after (you roll) the drops being pressed [/sounding].
## 39
Reach exhilaration in the presence of Svarṇara and, o Indra, in the  reed-filled (place).
Become exhilarated by the thought of Vivasvant.
## 40
Having grown all the way to heaven, the mace-bearing bull roared again  and again,
the smasher of obstacles, the best drinker of soma.
## 41
Because you are the first-born seer, being the only master by your might, o Indra, you keep poking out goods.
## 42
Up to our pressings and toward your delight, let the hundred straight-backed fallow bays carry you.
## 43
This earlier insight, swollen full of honey and ghee,
have the Kaṇvas increased through their recitation. 44. Of the great ones it is just Indra whom the mortal should choose at the  ritual offering,
Indra whom the one striving to win (should choose) for his help.
## 45
The fallow bays, praised by Priyamedha, will convey you near,
o much praised one, for soma-drinking.
## 46
At Tirindira’s I received a hundred and at Parśu’s a thousand
as the bounties of the Yāduvas.
## 47
Three hundred chargers, ten thousand cows
did they give to Pajra Sāman.
## 48
The prominent one has reached up to heaven, giving camels yoked  in fours,
and by his fame (has reached) the Yāduva people.