+++
title = "007"

+++
7 (627)
Maruts
Punarvatsa Kāṇva
36 verses: gāyatrī
Although a tr̥ca division is possible for this hymn, it does not impose itself.  This is one of only three Marut hymns in VIII (with VIII.20 and VIII.94).  As with most Marut hymns, this one contains considerable description of the  effects on the cosmos of these embodiments of storm and of their journey  through the midspace:  the bowing of the mountains, the violent winds and  rain, the roaring. These descriptions are found primarily in the first part of the  hymn (e.g., vss. 2–5, 7–8) and toward the end (see esp. vs. 34, with its bowing  mountains forming a ring with vss. 2 and 5). The middle portion of the hymn  (approximately vss. 11–21) expresses our desires for their presence at our sac rifice and for their gifts, with the last two verses (20–21) posing anxious ques
tions concerning the whereabouts of the Maruts and the loss of their attention.  This anxiety returns in two further question verses, 30–31, which preface the  Maruts’ final journey to the place of sacrifice, where they are praised together  with Agni (vss. 32–26).
Verses 22–26 present various fragments of mythology; particularly striking, and  baffling, is verse 26 with its mention of the poet Uśanā and the “loins of the ox,”  which may be a glancing reference to the Vala cave.
Like other long hymns in VIII the structure of this one is quite loose. However,  it does have at least a sketchy ring:  in addition to verses 2/5 and 34 mentioned  above, note the references to meter in the first and last verses (1 and 36). It is char acterized also by recycling of vocabulary, by rhetorical repetition (see, e.g., vss. 6,  9, 17, 22–24), and by frequent phonetic figures (a particularly nice one is found in  28ab:...pŕ̥ṣatī ráthe / práṣṭir...róhitaḥ).

## 1
In that the inspired poet has let flow the triṣṭubh refreshment to you, o  Maruts,
you rule [/shine] throughout the mountains.
## 2
In that you have certainly set your attention on your course, you  resplendent ones displaying your power,
the mountains have bent down.
## 3
They raise themselves upward with the winds—the bellowing ones  whose mother is Pr̥śni.
They have milked out swelling refreshment.
## 4
The Maruts scatter mist; they make the mountains tremble,
when they drive their course with the winds,
## 5
When the mountain peak (holds itself) down for your coursing, and the  rivers hold themselves down for your expansion and for your great  gusting.
## 6
You at night we invoke for help, you by day,
you when the ceremony is proceeding.
## 7
Up they rise, bright with ruddy breath, along their courses,
bellowing on the back of heaven.
## 8
They release the rein [/ray] with strength, for the sun to travel its path; they have extended themselves with its radiant beams.
## 9
This hymn of mine, o Maruts, this praise, o masters of the R̥bhus, this invocation of mine—long for it.
## 10
Three lakes did the dappled ones milk out as honey for the mace-bearer, a wellspring, a cask full of water.
## 11
Maruts, when seeking your benevolence we call you from heaven, then come here to us.
## 12
For—o Rudras, masters of the R̥bhus, possessing good drops—in  our house
and also in exhilaration you are provident.
## 13
Wealth, arousing exhilaration, consisting of much livestock,  all-nourishing—
impel it here to us from heaven, o Maruts.
## 14
When, as if on (the byways) of the peaks, you have set your attention  on your course, resplendent ones,
you become exhilarated with the drops being pressed [/sounding]. 15. A mortal might beg benevolence of them,
even of such an undeceivable (flock), with his prayers.
## 16
They who, like droplets, blow their blast through the two world-halves  along with their rains,
milking the unfailing wellspring,
## 17
Up they rise with their sounds [/with (the drops) being pressed], up with  their chariots, and up with the winds;
up with praises—they whose mother is Pr̥śni. 18. With which (aid) you aided Turvaśa and Yadu, with which (you aided)  Kaṇva, who gained the stakes,
may we receive (a portion) of this for wealth.
## 19
O you of good drops, these refreshments here swelling like ghee
will strengthen you, along with the prayers of the descendant of Kaṇva. 20. Where now do you become exhilarated, you of good drops, you for  whom the ritual grass has been twisted?
Who is the formulator who serves you?
## 21
For it is not (now) as it was before, when in return for our praises of you you used to animate the troops of truth, o you for whom the ritual
grass has been twisted.
## 22
They put together the great waters, together the two “opponents”  [=heaven and earth], together the sun,
together the mace, joint by joint.
## 23
They drove Vr̥tra apart, joint by joint, apart the mountains lacking  rules [/radiance],
performing a bullish manly deed.
## 24
They stood by the unbridled force and the resolve of Trita, while he was  fighting,
(stood) by Indra at the overcoming of Vr̥tra.
## 25
With lightning in their hands, heaven-bound—golden (helmet-)lips  (stretched out) on their head—
the resplendent ones anointed themselves for beauty.
## 26
When you drove with Uśanā from afar to the “loins of the ox” [=Vala  cave?],
like heaven it [=cave] roared with fear.
## 27
(Come) here to us, for the giving of bounty, with horses whose forefeet  are golden—
come near, o gods.
## 28
When the chestnut side-horse guides the dappled (mares yoked) to their  chariot,
the resplendent ones drive; they let flow the waters.
## 29
In (a place) of good soma, reed-filled, foamy, providing (soma’s)  dwelling,
the men drove in (their chariot) with down-turned wheels.
## 30
When will you come, o Maruts, to the inspired poet invoking (you) in  just this way,
(come) with merciful (aid) to the one needing assistance?
## 31
What is this now, you fair-weather friends?!—since you have deserted Indra, who vaunts himself on partnership with you?
## 32
O Kaṇvas, for us I will praise Agni along with the Maruts, who have  maces in their hands,
who have golden axes.1044 VIII.8
## 33
I (would turn) hither the bulls, worshiped first at the sacrifice, hither for  newer good progress,
would turn them who bring glittering prizes.
## 34
Even the peaks bend down, thinking themselves depths;
even the mountains hold themselves down.
## 35
Traveling crosswise the birds guide (the Maruts) here, as they [=Maruts]  fly through the midspace.
(The Maruts) establish vital energy for their praiser.
## 36
Since age-old Agni has (just) been born, like a metrical verse, with the  ray of the sun,
they [=Maruts] have extended themselves with its radiant beams.