+++
title = "008"

+++
8 (628)
Aśvins
Sadhvaṃsa Kāṇva
23 verses: anuṣṭubh
Despite the Anukramaṇī ascription, the poet of this hymn repeatedly identifies him self as Vatsa (vss. 7, 8, 11, 15, 19), the Kaṇva. His composition is monotonously  one-note: “Come/drive here to us” is found, with few variations, in the first seven  verses and in a number of later ones (10, 11, 14, 17, 19); the Aśvins are urged to leave  wherever in the cosmos they find themselves (e.g., vss. 3–4, 7, 14), in order to come  to our sacrifice, and the usual anxieties about competing sacrificers who might tempt  the gods to pass us by are on view (vs. 8). The poet’s uncertainty about the location  of the Aśvins and his desire to lure the gods to his sacrifice and away from his com petitors are summed up in the final verse (23), with its paradoxical presentation of  the “three footsteps” of the Aśvins, which are both visible and hidden. The evocation
of Viṣṇu’s three strides is probably deliberate, but the reasons for it unclear. There is little other content in the hymn beyond the urged journey, the offered  sacrifice, and the expressed hopes for bounties in exchange. Verse 10 briefly and  obliquely alludes to the maiden Sūryā’s mounting of the Aśvins’ chariot, from the  well-known myth about Sūryā’s marriage, and the names of some successful clients  of the Aśvins are listed in verses 20–21.
## 1
Come here to us, o Aśvins, with all forms of help;
you wondrous ones whose track is golden—drink the somian honey.
## 2
Now drive here with your sun-skinned chariot, o Aśvins,
you benefactors decorated in gold, you poets of deep perception.
## 3
Drive here from Nahus, here from the midspace by reason of our  well-twisted hymns.
You will drink the honey pressed at the pressing of the Kaṇvas, o Aśvins. 4. Drive here to us from heaven, here from the midspace, o you (invoked  with) “then, friends.” The son of Kaṇva has pressed the somian honey for you here.
## 5
Drive here to us for soma-drinking upon hearing
“Svāhā!” and the praise song—o strengthening Aśvins; (drive) forth by  reason of our insightful thoughts, you poets and superior men.
## 6
Even as seers previously called upon you for help, o men,
drive here, o Aśvins; come right up to this good praise of mine here.
## 7
Come here to us even from the luminous realm of heaven, o finders of  the sun,
you who are attentive to Vatsa by reason of his insights and listen to  our summons by reason of our praise songs.
## 8
Do those other than us sit around (you) with their praise songs, Aśvins? The son of Kaṇva, the seer Vatsa, has strengthened you with his hymns! 9. The inspired poet has called you here for help, o Aśvins,
stainless ones, best smashers of obstacles: become joy itself for us.
## 10
When the maiden [=Sūryā] mounted your chariot,
you set forth to all conceivable things, you Aśvins whose goods are
prizewinning mares.
## 11
From there drive here with your chariot with its thousandfold raiment,  o Aśvins.
Vatsa has recited for you his honeyed speech—he a poet, son of a poet. 12. The two delightful to many who bring many good things, the two  minders of riches,
the Aśvins, as draft-animals, have bellowed out to this praise song
of mine.
## 13
Provide to us here all bounties that won’t shame us, o Aśvins;
make us follow proper sequence: don’t make us subject to scorn!
## 14
When, Nāsatyas, you are in the far distance or when upon the
circumference [?],
from there drive here with your chariot with its thousandfold raiment,  o Aśvins.
## 15
O Nāsatyas, the seer Vatsa, who has strengthened you with his hymns, for him provide refreshment with thousandfold raiment, dripping
with ghee.
## 16
O Aśvins, offer nourishment dripping with ghee to him
who will praise you for your favor and will seek goods from you, o lords  of the drop.
## 17
Come here to this praise song of ours, o you who care for the stranger  and provide many benefits.
Make us very splendid, you superior men. Grant these things for us to  prevail.
## 18
The Priyamedhas have called you here with all your forms of help— you who rule over the rites, o Aśvins—(who listen) to their calls on
your journey.

## 19
Come here to us as joy and luck itself, o Aśvins,
(to him), Vatsa, who has strengthened you with his insightful thoughts  and hymns, o you who seek admiration.
## 20
With (those forms of help) with which you helped Kaṇva and
Medhātithi, with which Vaśa Daśavraja,
with which Gośarya, with those help us, o men;
## 21
With which you helped Trasadasyu when the stake was to be
decided, o men,
with those help us, to win the prize, o Aśvins.
## 22
Let the well-twisted praise songs and hymns strengthen you, o Aśvins, found in many places, best smashers of obstacles: become the ones who  provide many desired things to us.
## 23
There are three footsteps of the Aśvins—though being visible they are  hidden far away.
(Let) the two poets (drive) nearby along the flights of truth, away from  (other) living beings.