+++
title = "009"

+++
9 (629)
Aśvins
Śaśakarṇa Kāṇva
21 verses: br̥hatī 1, 4, 6, 14, 15; gāyatrī 2, 3, 20, 21; kakubh 5; anuṣṭubh 7–9, 13, 16–19;  triṣṭubh 10; virāj 11; jagatī 12, all arranged in trcas ̥
As is clear from the display above, a dizzying variety of meters is found in this  hymn. However, as Oldenberg points out (1888: 151), save for the tr̥ca composed of  verses 10–12, all these differently named meters are composed of combinations of  eight- and twelve-syllable pādas, which combine easily and without confusion, and  several tr̥cas consist of a single meter (anuṣṭubh vss. 7–9, 16–18).
As in the previous hymn, the poet identifies himself several times as Vatsa  (vss. 1, 6, 15); the Anukramaṇī’s ascription to Śaśakarṇa (“Hare-eared”) may be  taken as a nickname or simply a fanciful invention, as it has no verbal support  in the hymn.
The contents of the hymn are both as various as its meters and, underlyingly,  as harmonious. Certain expressions recur throughout the hymn (half-verse initial ā́ nūnám “here and now,” alternating with simple ā́ “here”; repeated yád and yád vā “when”/“or when”; repeated prá). The poet focuses on asking the Aśvins for aid  and protection, and offers sacrificial service in return. A tr̥ca late in the hymn (vss.  16–18) is addressed to Dawn in her relation to the Aśvins, a connection that fixes  the ritual time of at least that part of the hymn as the Morning Pressing.
## 1
Here and now, o Aśvins, come to the aid of Vatsa.
Hold out to him broad shelter that keeps the wolf at bay; keep away
whatever hostilities there are. 2. What (manly power) is in the midspace, what in heaven, what through  the five peoples of Manu,
confer that manly power (on us), o Aśvins.
## 3
(There are) inspired poets who have fondled your wondrous powers all  over, o Aśvins—
even so, take note only of the son of Kaṇva.
## 4
Here is the hot milk poured around for you, o Aśvins, together with a  praise song,
here the honeyed soma with which you will attend to Vr̥tra [/the
obstacle], o you who bring prize mares as goods.
## 5
What (healing remedy) you made in the waters, what in the tree, what in  plants, o you of many wondrous powers,
with that help me, o Aśvins.
## 6
(Even) when you are bustling about, Nāsatyas, or when you are engaged  in healing, o gods,
this Vatsa does not get enough of his poetic thoughts for you—for you  go to the man with an offering.
## 7
Here and now the seer attends to the praise song for the Aśvins in  exchange for a thing of value.
Here he will pour the most honeyed soma and the hot milk in the
presence of the fire-priest.
## 8
Here and now you two will mount the swift-tracked chariot, o Aśvins. Here should these praise songs of mine move you, like a cloud.
## 9
If today we would move you with our hymns, o Nāsatyas,
or with our voices, o Aśvins, even so, take note only of the son
of Kaṇva.
## 10
As when Kakṣīvant (called) you, as when Vyaśva, as when the seer  Dīrghatamas called you,
as when Pr̥thi Vainya (called) you to the ritual seats, even so, take
cognizance just of this.
## 11
Drive to us as protectors of our shelter and protectors from afar;  become protectors of our moving (possessions [=livestock]) and
protectors of our bodies.
Drive your circuit for our progeny and posterity (to prosper),
## 12
When you drive with Indra on the same chariot or when you come to  share the same home with Vāyu, o Aśvins,
when you are joined in fellowship with the Ādityas and R̥bhus or when  you stand in the strides of Viṣṇu.
## 13
If today I should call on you in order to to win the prize, o Aśvins— the might that is for victory in battles: that is the best help of the
Aśvins.

## 14
Here and now, o Aśvins, drive here. Here are oblations set out for you; here are soma-drinks for you at Turvaśa’s and Yadu’s (sacrifice) and
here also among the Kaṇvas.
## 15
The healing remedy that is in the distance and (the one) nearby, o  Nāsatyas,
with that now extend shelter to Vimada and to Vatsa, o attentive ones.
## 16
I have woken up with the goddess [=Dawn], simultaneously with my  speech for the Aśvins:
o goddess, you have uncovered my (poetic) thought here, uncovered the  gift for mortals.
## 17
Wake up the Aśvins, o Dawn—(wake them) up, o goddess, liberal  and great,
(wake them) up in due order, o Hotar of the sacrifice [=Agni]. (Wake)  up lofty fame for our exhilaration.
## 18
When, o Dawn, you drive with your radiant beam, you shine together  with the sun.
This chariot of the Aśvins drives here along the circuit protective
of men.
## 19
When the swollen shoots, like cows, yield their milk with their udders, or when their voices have bellowed, those seeking the gods (wake) up  the Aśvins.
## 20
Up for brilliance, up for swelling might, up for victory over men and for  shelter,
up for ritual skill, you attentive ones—
## 21
Now when by reason of our insights you sit down at the womb of the  father, o Aśvins,
or when by reason of your favors, you praiseworthy ones.