+++
title = "010"

+++
10 (630)
Aśvins
Pragātha Kāṇva
6 verses: br̥hatī 1, 5, madhyejyotis 2, anuṣṭubh 3, āstārapaṅkti 4, satobr̥hatī 6, arranged  in pragāthas
Like the previous hymn, this one contains a number of different meters, though all  fall into the twelve- and eight-syllable pādas that combine easily into mixed lyric  hymns. Unlike the tr̥ca structure of the last hymn, this one is arranged in pragāthas,  the first two of which (vss. 1–4) are irregular, while the last (5–6) has the familiar  br̥hatī/satobr̥hatī alternation.
The hymn is a distillation of one of the key themes in the much longer Aśvin  hymns that precede it (VIII.8–9). The last pādas of the first and last verses are iden tical: “from there drive here, o Aśvins,” and most of the rest of the hymn (vss. 1–2, 5–6) consists of speculation on where “there” might be, with an array of cosmic  locations suggested. The middle two verses (3–4) invoke the Aśvins and remind  them of their devotion to us and to our sacrifice.
## 01
If you are at (the place) providing a long seat [=earth/ritual ground], or if  you are yonder in the luminous realm of heaven,
or if on the sea or in a house made ready, from there drive here, o
Aśvins.
## 02
Or if you two have mixed the sacrifice for Manu, even so, take note only  of the son of Kaṇva.
I call upon Br̥haspati and all the gods, upon Indra and Viṣṇu and the  Aśvins with swift missiles.
## 03
Now I call upon these Aśvins of very wondrous powers, the two made  for grasping,
whose comradeship for us is preeminent and their friendship among  the gods,
## 04
For whom (our) sacrifices and patrons are preeminent (even?) at the  sunless time.
They are attentive to our sacrifice and ceremony—those who drink the  somian honey after their wont.
## 05
If today you are in the west, if in the east, o Aśvins whose goods are  prizewinning mares,
if with Druhyu, Anu, Turvaśa or Yadu, I call upon you—so come to me. 6. If you are flying in the midspace or if along these two world-halves, o  you who provide many benefits,
or if, after your wont, you are standing upon your chariot, from there  drive here, o Aśvins.