+++
title = "011"

+++
11 (631)
Agni
Vatsa Kāṇva
10 verses: gāyatrī, except pratiṣṭhā 1, vardhamāna 2, triṣṭubh 10, arranged in trcas, ̥ with a final verse
This is the last hymn in the Vatsa group and the only one dedicated to Agni.  Compared to earlier hymns in the cycle it is both brief and, as Renou points out  (EVP 13: 147), elementary. Nonetheless it is a pleasing composition, with adroit  deployment of contrastive terms, such as “mortal/god,” and of parallel structures,  such as “to be X-ed at Y” (vss. 1, 2, 10—the last also providing a simple ring).
## 1
You, Agni, are the protector of commandments, a god here among  mortals here;
you are to be reverently invoked at the sacrifices.

## 2
You are to be proclaimed at the rites,
o overpowering Agni, as the charioteer of the ceremonies.
## 3
Keep away hatreds from us, o Jātavedas,
and ungodly hostilities, o Agni.
## 4
The sacrifice of the cheating mortal, even though it be nearby—
you do not seek it out.
## 5
Of you the immortal we mortals revere the many names—
(we) inspired poets (revere the names) of Jātavedas.
## 6
We inspired poets call upon the inspired one for help, we mortals upon  the god for aid,
upon Agni with our hymns.
## 7
Vatsa will guide your mind here, even from your most distant seat, o Agni, with a hymn whose desire is you.
## 8
Because you are of the same aspect in many places, preeminent
throughout all the clans,
in combats we call upon you.
## 9
In combats we call upon Agni for help as we seek the prize,
upon him who provides brilliant bounties when prizes (are at stake).
## 10
For as the ancient one to be invoked at the ceremonies, the Hotar both  from of old and also anew, take your seat.
Give pleasure to your own body, o Agni, and win good fortune for us  through sacrifice.
Hymns 12–18 form the third group of hymns in Maṇḍala VIII, which, as Oldenberg  notes in his Prolegomena (1888: 214), clearly belong together, despite the internal  absence of poets’ names and the varying attributions of the Anukramaṇī. All but  the last of these hymns (VIII.18 [Ādityas]) are dedicated to Indra and arranged  properly by descending numbers of verses.