+++
title = "012"

+++
12 (632)
Indra
Parvata Kāṇva
33 verses: uṣṇih, arranged in trcas. ̥
R̥gveda VIII.12 is tightly structured: the meter is uṣṇih (8 8 12), and in each tr̥ca  the last four syllables of the final pāda form a refrain, which is, however, syntacti cally integrated into the verse. The last two tr̥cas before the final one (vss. 25–27,  28–30) expand the four-syllable refrain to full pāda length (that is, the final twelve  syllables), which retards the verbal progress and hints at the end to come. The long  refrain of verses 25–27, “just after that your two beloved fallow bays waxed strong,” echoes the short refrain of the second tr̥ca (vss. 4–6), “you have waxed strong,” and  thus hints at a ring composition as well.
The verb form shared by those two refrains (“waxed strong,” root vakṣ) is found  elsewhere in the hymn, as are synonyms (root vr̥dh:  “grow strong, make strong,  increase”) and near synonyms (“spread,” “swell”), and this verbal material pro vides the thematic spine of the hymn. Otherwise there is a mixture of mythological  material, especially toward the end, and invitations to and descriptions of the sac rifice. In the final tr̥ca (vss. 31–33) the poet announces the launch of his own hymn,  that is, the hymn to which this tr̥ca forms the end, and asks for the usual bounties  from Indra.
## 1
Most powerful Indra, your exhilaration that is conspicuous as the best  drinker of soma,
with which you strike down the devourer—for that we beg.
## 2
That with which (you helped) Daśagva and Adhrigu possessing solar  glory, who sets atremble,
with which you helped the sea—for that we beg.
## 3
(That) by which you impel the great waters forth to the Sindhu like  chariots
to travel the path of truth—for that we beg.
## 4
This praise song for dominance, purified like ghee, o master of the  stones,
by which now in a single day with might you have waxed strong—
## 5
This one enjoy, o you who yearn for songs—it swells like the sea. O Indra, with all your forms of help you have waxed strong.
## 6
The god from afar who has become ready for partnership with us— spreading like the one who spreads the rain from heaven [=Parjanya],  you have waxed strong.
## 7
His beacons waxed strong and the mace in his two hands,
when, like the sun, he made the two worlds grow.
## 8
When, o full-grown master of settlements, you devoured a thousand  buffaloes,
just after that your great Indrian power grew forth.
## 9
With the rays of the sun Indra burns down Arśasāna;
victorious like fire over the woods, he grew forth.
## 10
This newer visionary thought goes to you, conforming to her season  [/to the ritual sequence].
Rendering service, dear to many—she is (well-)measured indeed.
## 11
As embryo of the sacrifice, seeking the gods, (the thought?) purifies its  intention following the proper order.
By praises of Indra it has grown—it is (well-)measured indeed.

## 12
Indra, who is the gain from our alliance, spreads himself out for  soma-drinking.
(The thought) advancing like an axe for the presser—it is (well-) measured indeed.
## 13
Whom [=Indra] the inspired Āyus, whose conveyance is solemn speech,  have brought to exhilaration—
like ghee, it swells in his mouth—(the speech) that belongs to truth. 14. And Aditi gave birth to the praise song for Indra, the sovereign king, (the song) proclaimed by many for his help—(the song) that belongs  to truth.
## 15
The draft-horses have roared to (him) for help and for his glorification. Your two fallow bays, o god, do not follow a commandment separate  (from the one) that belongs to truth.
## 16
When (you drink) soma in company with Viṣṇu or when with Trita  Āptya,
or when in company with the Maruts you reach exhilaration with  the drops—
## 17
Or when, able one, you reach exhilaration at a distance, upon the sea, take pleasure just in our pressing with its drops—
## 18
Or when you are the strengthener of the presser, of the sacrificer, o lord  of settlements,
or in whose solemn speech you take pleasure—together with the drops.
## 19
Upon hymning the god time after time, for (him) to help you, upon  hymning Indra time after time,
then they came through to victory for the sacrifice.
## 20
With sacrifices (they strengthened) him whose vehicle is the sacrifice,  with soma-drinks the best soma-drinker;
with libations they strengthened Indra—they came through.
## 21
Great is his guidance and many are the encomia for him.
All good things are for the pious man—they came through.
## 22
Indra did the gods set in front to smash Vr̥tra.
To Indra did their voices roar—entirely for his might.
## 23
To him, great through his greatness, to him hearing the summons  through our praise songs
and chants do we keep roaring—entirely for his might.
## 24
The mace-bearer whom the two worlds do not encompass, nor the  midspaces,
just from his own onslaught he has flared up—entirely from his might.
## 25
When, o Indra, at the battle-charge the gods set you in front, just after that your two beloved fallow bays waxed strong. 26. When, o mace-bearer, with your vast power you smashed Vr̥tra who was  blocking the rivers,
just after that your two beloved fallow bays waxed strong.
## 27
When Viṣṇu strode his three steps by your might,
just after that your two beloved fallow bays waxed strong.
## 28
When your two beloved fallow bays grew strong from day to day, just after that all these worlds held themselves in submission to you.
## 29
When the Marutian clans held themselves down for you,
just after that all these worlds held themselves in submission to you.
## 30
When you fixed yonder sun, the blazing light, fast in heaven,
just after that all these worlds held themselves in submission to you.
## 31
The inspired poet, through his insights, raises this good praise to you, Indra, which guides its kin safely across, like footsteps, while the ceremony is  pro(ceeding).
## 32
When they have sounded in unison in his own dear domain,
in the navel of the sacrifice, along with the milking, while the ceremony  is pro(ceeding),
## 33
Indra, give to us the possession of good heroes, of good horses, of  good cows,
like a Hotar, (for us) to be first in your thought, while the ceremony is  pro(ceeding).