+++
title = "013"

+++
13 (633) Indra
Nārada Kāṇva
33 verses: uṣṇih, arranged in trcas ̥
Though, like the previous hymn (VIII.12), this one is in uṣṇih meter and arranged  in tr̥cas, the tight structuring of VIII.12 is absent here, save in the final tr̥ca (vss.  31–33) with its four-syllable refrain and repeated identifications with the “bull,” and  most of the tr̥cas lack clear unity. The theme of growing and making strong found  in VIII.12 is continued here, however—notably in the first tr̥ca (vss. 1–3) and that  formed by verses 16–18, but also generally throughout the hymn. There are also less  insistent links between different parts of the hymn (e.g., the tree branches of vss. 6,  17), and some pleasing turns of phrase, like the “sea of the stalk” (vs. 15) referring  to a particular large vessel of soma.
Mythological material is mostly lacking in the hymn, and what is found is given  perfunctory treatment (see the allusions to the Maruts in vss. 20 and 28–29). The  focus instead is the usual give-and-take of the ritual compact. Although the hymn  has no spectacularly memorable features, it does not seem to deserve Geldner’s  scornful dismissal as “ein recht nichtssagendes [‘trivial’ or ‘vacuous’] Lied.”1054 VIII.13
## 1
When the soma juices have been pressed, Indra purifies his resolve,  which is worthy of hymns.
He knows his own strengthening skill, for he is great.
## 2
In the first highest heaven, in the seat of the gods, he is the
strengthening one,
affording good passage, foremost in fame, entirely victorious amid the  waters.
## 3
I call on him, on Indra the tempestuous, for the winning of prizes, for  plunder.
Become, for us in your favor, our closest comrade, for strengthening.
## 4
This gift here, o Indra who yearns for songs, streams for you from the  one who presses.
Becoming exhilarated, you rule over this ritual grass.
## 5
Now, o Indra, give us that which we pressers beg of you.
Bring here to us the shimmering wealth that finds the sun.
## 6
When the boundless praiser makes bold his songs for you,
your *vitality grows afterward as branches do, when they take pleasure.
## 7
As of old, I will give birth to the songs: hear the call of the singer. At every revel you have waxed strong for the one who performs
(rituals) well.
## 8
Like waters going along a downward slope, they play—the liberal  gifts of him
who is called the lord of heaven by this visionary thought.
## 9
And who is called lord of the separate peoples—he alone exerts  his will—
by those strengthening (him) through reverence, seeking help. Rejoice in  the pressed (soma).
## 10
Praise the famous one who is attentive to poetic inspiration, to whom  belong the two overpowering fallow bays
that go to the house of the pious and reverential man.
## 11
You of great thought, ramming through with your horses frothing at  the mouth,
with the swift ones, drive here to the sacrifice—for it is surely weal  for you.
## 12
O Indra, most powerful lord of settlements, fix wealth fast in the  singers,
and immortal fame and goods for our patrons.
## 13
I call upon you when the sun has risen; I call upon (you) at the day’s  midday.
Rejoicing, Indra, come here to us with your teams. 14. Come here! Run forth! Take the exhilaration of the pressed (soma)  accompanied by cows.
Stretch the ancient thread in the way that is known.
## 15
Whether, able one, you are in the far distance, whether nearby,
Vr̥tra-smiter,
or whether at the sea of the stalk, it is just you who are our helper.
## 16
Let our songs increase Indra, let our pressed drops (increase) Indra; in Indra have the oblation-bearing clans found joy.
## 17
Just him did the inspired poets, seeking aid, (increase) with downward  coursing help.
The battle cries made Indra increase, as tree-branches do.
## 18
The gods stretched for themselves a noteworthy sacrifice among the  Trikadrukas.
Just him [=Indra] let our hymns increase—him who ever increases.
## 19
When the praiser, following his own commandment, has set out his  recitations for you in proper sequence,
he is called gleaming, pure, and unerring.
## 20
He perceives just that youthful (troop) of Rudra [=Maruts] in the  ancient domains,
where the discerning ones [=Maruts?] have distributed that thought.
## 21
If you will choose my companionship, drink of this stalk,
by which we have crossed beyond all hatreds.
## 22
O Indra who longs for songs, when will your praiser become most  wealful for you?
When will you place us amid bovine and equine goods?
## 23
And your two well-praised bullish fallow bays pull your chariot
to (the soma) most exhilarating to (you) who do not age—for whom  we beg.
## 24
For him do we beg, him praised by many, the youthful one with his  ancient forms of help.
He will sit down upon the dear ritual grass once again.
## 25
Become increased, o you who are praised by many, with your forms of  help that are praised by the seers.
Milk out swelling refreshment, and help us.
## 26
O Indra, it is only you who are the helper of him who praises just so, o  master of the stones.
From out of the truth I raise to you my insight yoked by mind.
## 27
Yoking here your two feasting companions, for soma-drinking,
cry out to the fallow bays that bring the “forth to that”
wealth, Indra.

## 28
Let them cry out—those who are yours: the Rudras accompany your  splendor,
as do the clans of Maruts, to your satisfaction.
## 29
These (clans), his advance (troops), find pleasure in the track that is in  heaven.
In the navel of the sacrifice they have joined together, as is (well-)
known.
## 30
This one—to take the long view while the rite is going forth toward  the east—
measures the sacrifice in proper order, having surveyed it.
## 31
A bull is this chariot of yours, Indra, and your fallow bays are
also bulls.
A bull are you, o you of a hundred resolves, and our call is a bull.
## 32
A bull is the pressing stone, a bull the exhilarating drink, and a bull this  pressed soma here.
A bull is the sacrifice that you urge onward, and our call is a bull.
## 33
As a bull, I call upon you, the bull, o mace-bearer, together with your  brilliant help,
for you cherish a responsive praise, and our call is a bull.