+++
title = "014"

+++
14 (634)
Indra
Goṣūktin Kāṇvāyana and Aśvasūktin Kāṇvāyana
15 verses: gāyatrī, arranged in trcas ̥
This hymn begins with a pleasing playfulness: the poet teases Indra by declaring  that, if their places were switched, he (the poet as Indra) would be far more gener ous than Indra is now being (vss. 1–3), with the argument made in the next tr̥ca  (vss. 4–6; see also 10–12) that the strength Indra acquires from the sacrifice gives  him the power to be generous. Two tr̥cas in the hymn are devoted to Indra’s great  deeds: verses 7–9 to the splitting of the Vala cave and the supporting of the heavenly  realms, verses 13–15 to several different exploits, most notably the decapitation of  the demon Namuci (vs. 13). Though Namuci is mentioned several other times in the  text, this is the only place in the R̥gveda that refers to the later story of Indra’s trick
ery directed against Namuci: pledging not to slay him with anything dry or wet, he  used seafoam as his weapon. (The earliest clear version of this tale is probably that  in Maitrāyaṇī Saṃhitā IV.3.4, but it is recounted in several other Brāhmaṇa texts  and into epic and Classical Sanskrit. See M. Bloomfield [1893: 143–63]. For a pos
sible indirect reference in the R̥gveda, see I.104.3.)
The gāyatrī meter and tr̥ca structure, combined with the conversational tone of  the opening verses, give this hymn a light texture and informal style that contrast  nicely with the more ponderous Indra hymns in the early parts of Maṇḍala VIII. 1. Indra, if I, like you, were, all alone, lord over goods,
my praiser would have cows as his companions.
## 02
I would do my best for him. I would want to give to him who possesses  inspired thought, o lord of power—
if I were master of cattle.
## 03
Your liberal spirit is a milk-cow for the sacrificer, for the presser: swelling, she gives the cow and horse as her milk.
## 04
There exists no one to obstruct your generosity, Indra, neither god nor  mortal,
when, praised, you want to give bounty.
## 05
The sacrifice made Indra strong, when he unrolled the earth,
creating for himself a headdress in heaven.
## 06
You who have grown strong and won all the stakes—
we choose your help, Indra.
## 07
In the exhilaration of soma he spread out the midspace and the  luminous realms—
Indra did, when he split Vala.
## 08
He drove up the cattle for the Aṅgirases, making visible those that were  hidden.
He shoved Vala nearby.
## 09
Through Indra the luminous realms of heaven are firm and made firm, stable and not to be shoved aside.
## 10
Like the waters’ wave that brings exhilaration, the praise song hastens  rapidly (to you), Indra.
The exhilarating drinks have shone forth for you.
## 11
For you are the strengthener of praise songs, Indra, the strengthener of  recitations,
and the creator of good fortune for your praisers.
## 12
Just Indra will the hairy(-maned) fallow bays carry for the
soma-drinking
right up to the sacrifice—him who is very generous.
## 13
With the foam of the waters you made the head of Namuci roll, Indra, when you conquered all contenders.
## 14
They who, through their wiles, were trying to creep up and mount to  heaven, Indra,
those Dasyus did you send tumbling down.
## 15
Indra, you made the community that performs no (soma-)pressing  vanish away in all directions—
you as the soma-drinker getting the upper hand.
