+++
title = "015"

+++
15 (635)
Indra
Goṣūktin Kāṇvāyana and Aśvasūktin Kāṇvāyana
13 verses: uṣṇih, arranged in trcas, with a final verse ̥
Attributed to the same poets as the preceding VIII.14, this hymn is a more conven tional praise hymn. It asserts the dominance of Indra over all the cosmos (esp. vss.  2–6), and conversely the contribution the cosmic entities and the various other gods  make to Indra’s power (vss. 7–10). The final tr̥ca (10–12), with its coda apparently  addressed to Soma (vs. 13), seeks to harness all Indra’s powers for victory for our  side, and thus echoes the poet’s opening charge to his comrades (vs. 1). The return  to the beginning is also signaled by a ring-compositional device: the first two pādas  of verse 11 are almost identical to those of verse 3 in the Sanskrit, though their  translations diverge somewhat.
Both the language and the structure of this hymn are straightforward, but its  relatively simplicity avoids the banal by the deft balancing of the powers in the two  contrastive sections of the hymn and the unembellished grandeur of the rhetoric.
## 01
Sing forth to him, much invoked and much praised.
Seek to entice mighty Indra here with hymns,
## 02
Him, the doubly lofty, whose lofty power holds fast the two
world-halves,
the mountains and plains, the waters and sun, through his bullishness. 3. You, o much praised one, are the ruler; you alone keep smashing  obstacles,
o Indra, to extend victories and (deeds) worthy of fame.
## 04
We hymn your exhilaration, an overpowering bull in battles,
creating wide space, bringing the splendor of fallow bays, o master of  the stone—
## 05
By which you found the lights for Āyu and Manu.
Becoming exhilarated, you rule over this ritual grass.
## 06
Even today do the reciters praise this (deed) of yours, as in the earlier way: you shall win the waters, whose husband is a bull, day after day.
## 07
This lofty Indrian power of yours, your unbridled force and resolve, and the mace worthy to be chosen—these does the Holy Place sharpen. 8. Heaven increases your manliness, Indra, earth your fame;
the waters and mountains spur you on.
## 09
Viṣṇu, the lofty dwelling place, hymns you, as do Mitra and Varuṇa. The Marut troop cheers you on.
## 10
You are the bull of the peoples; you were born as the most
munificent, Indra.
In every way you have acquired all things that bring good descendants. 11. In every way, o much-praised one, you alone stream over obstacles. None other than Indra spurs more action.
## 12
When, o Indra, they call upon you for help, every man for himself,  according to his own thought,
with our superior men win the sun now.
## 13
Fit (to be) a great dwelling for us, entering into all forms, (o Soma,) excite Indra, the lord of power, to victory.