+++
title = "016"

+++
16 (636) Indra
Irimbiṭhi Kāṇva
12 verses: gāyatrī, arranged in trcas ̥
This is, in some ways, a meta–praise hymn, that is, a hymn about praising Indra.  Although the hymn is certainly full of actual praise of the deity, it also repeatedly  refers to invoking, praising, singing to, and giving recognition to Indra and his pow ers and deeds—in other words, to the delivery of the praise itself. Perhaps related  to this feature is the noteworthy fact that Indra is in the 3rd person throughout the  hymn, until the direct address and requests of the final verse (12). The constant  3rd-person reference is emphasized by regular fronting and incantatory repetition  of 3rd-person pronouns referring to Indra (see, e.g., vss. 5–6, 8–9) and of his name  (see, e.g., vss. 7, 9, 11).
As for the content of the praise, it focuses on Indra’s power in warfare, where  separate peoples vie for his aid. Yet, despite the battle theme, the descriptions are  surprisingly devoid of violence, and it is Indra as maker of space (from constric tion, vs. 6) and light (from darkness, vs. 10) and as the verbal advocate for his clients  (vs. 5) who stands out.
## 1
Start up the praise anew with songs to the sovereign king of the separate  peoples, Indra,
the man who overpowers men, the most munificent,
## 2
In whom recitations find their joy, and all (deeds) worthy of fame, as the aid of the waters does in the sea.
## 3
With my good praise I seek to entice him, the preeminent king, effective  at raiding,
the prizewinner, for the gains of the great (prize?).
## 4
To whom belong the exhilarating drinks—unfailing, deep, wide,
overwhelming—
that produce his excitement at the contest of champions...
## 5
Just upon him do they call for intercession when the stakes are set. Whoever has Indra—they win.

## 6
It’s just him that the separate peoples recognize by his exploits, him by  his deeds:
“That’s Indra, who creates wide space!”
## 7
Indra is the formulator, Indra the seer, Indra the many times
much-invoked
great one with great powers.
## 8
He is to be praised, he to be invoked—the real “real thing,” powerfully  ranging.
Even though alone, he is overwhelming.
## 9
Him with chants, him with melodies, him with songs
do the separate peoples, the settlements make strong: Indra—
## 10
The leader to a better state, the creator of light in combats,
conquering foes in battle.
## 11
He, our deliverer, much invoked, will deliver us to the far shore by boat, beyond all hatreds, with well-being: Indra.
## 12
You, o Indra—with prizes of victory do honor to us, and provide  us a way,
and lead us to your favor.