+++
title = "017"

+++
17 (637)
Indra
Irimbiṭhi Kāṇva
15 verses: gāyatrī 1–13, br̥hatī 14, satobr̥hatī 15
Coming at the end of the Indra collection in this self-contained group (VIII.12–18),  this hymn consists of fifteen verses and is thus longer than the two previous hymns.  This over-length, combined with its metrical disunity and the varying use of the  verses in later Vedic ritual, suggests that the “hymn” is actually a composite of  three: verses 1–10, consisting of three tr̥cas plus a final verse; another independent  tr̥ca, verses 11–13; and a final pragātha, verses 14–15. (For details, see Oldenberg  1888: 139 n. 1 and 214 n. 2.)
The first and longest of the three hymns (vss. 1–10) is a straightforward invita tion to soma, urging Indra to make the journey to our sacrifice and promising an  ecstatic immersion in the liquid. There are several striking images toward the end,  especially that of the soma mixed with milk as a woman in disguise going to a ren dezvous (if our interpretation is correct) (vs. 7), and a vivid picture of Indra in the  grip of soma-exhilaration (vs. 8). Only the last verse (10), tacked onto the final tr̥ca,  asks for something in return.
The other two hymns, or hymn fragments, are more opaque. The first (vss.  11–13) begins with a conventional invitation to Indra, but the following two verses  address otherwise unknown men involved in some way in the soma sacrifice. The  final pragātha (vss. 14–15) first gives a praiseful description of the soma drop in verse 14, but ends with yet another unknown man also engaged in the soma sacri fice, who seems to have some success in getting Indra to drink it.
## 01
Drive here—for we have pressed soma for you, Indra. Drink this! Sit here upon this ritual grass of mine.
## 02
Let your hairy(-maned) fallow bays, yoked by sacred formulations,  convey you here, Indra.
Listen to our formulations.
## 03
We formulators, with you as our yokemate, call upon you, Indra— provided with soma, possessing pressings, we call upon the
soma-drinker.
## 04
Drive here to us, who have the pressings, here to our good praises. Drink of the stalk, (fair-)lipped one.
## 05
I pour (it) into your two cheeks. Let it run along and across your limbs. Grasp the honey with your tongue.
## 06
Let it be sweet for you sweetening; (let it be) honeyed for your body. Let the soma be weal for your heart.
## 07
Let this soma, completely covered (with milk), slink forth to you, like (covered) women (to a rendezvous), o boundless Indra.
## 08
Strong-necked, bulging-bellied, mighty-armed Indra in the exhilaration  of the stalk
keeps smashing obstacles.
## 09
Indra, go forth in front, holding sway over all with your might.
Smash obstacles, o smasher of obstacles [/Vr̥tra].
## 10
Let your hook be long by which you hold out goods
to the sacrificer who presses (soma).
## 11
Here is your soma, Indra, purified down onto the ritual grass.
Come here to it! Run, drink of it!
## 12
Śācigu, Śācipūjana, this has been pressed for your joy.
Ākhaṇḍala, you are called forth.
## 13
O grandson, great-grandson of Śr̥ṅgavr̥s—your (soma)
to-be-drunk-from-a-jar:
upon that has (Indra) fixed his mind.
## 14
O Lord of the Dwelling Place, a steadfast pillar, armor for comrades  in soma
is the drop, a splitter of strongholds, one after the other. Indra is the  comrade of ecstatics.
## 15
Pr̥dākusanu, worthy of the sacrifice, seeking cattle—even though he is  one, he sur(rounds) the many.
He leads forward, by thrust and grasp, the ardent horse that is Indra, to  drink of the soma.
