+++
title = "018"

+++
18 (638) Ādityas
Irimbiṭhi Kāṇva
22 verses: uṣṇih, arranged in trcas, with a final verse ̥
Like the other hymns to the Ādityas in VIII (47, 67), this hymn is fairly elementary  and rarely strays far from its theme—the hope that the Ādityas (and, toward the  end [vss. 16, 20, 21], other gods) will provide protection from various dangers and  enemies and long life for us and our offspring. There is a fair amount of coherence  within tr̥cas—for example, the dominance of Aditi in verses 4–6, the repetition of  śám “weal” and the four-syllable tag refrain in verses 7–9.
## 1
Here and now a mortal should seek a share of their favor,
the unprecedented (favor) of the Ādityas, at the impulsion (of Savitar), 2. For the paths of these Ādityas are without assault,
and undeceivable are the protectors who provide strength on an
easy road.
## 3
Let Savitar, Bhaga, Varuṇa, Mitra, and Aryaman
extend to us that broad shelter for which we beg.
## 4
O goddess Aditi, you whose burden [=fetus(es)] cannot be harmed— come here with the gods,
along with patrons who provide good shelter, o you dear to many,
## 5
For these sons of Aditi know how to keep away hostilities—
the faultless ones who make wide (space) even out of narrow straits.
## 6
Let Aditi (protect) our livestock by day, let Aditi the unduplicitous (do  so) by night;
let ever-strengthening Aditi protect us from narrow straits.
## 7
And this Aditi, (like) a *banner by day, will come with her help;
she will make wealfulness and joy. – Failures away!
## 8
And those two heavenly healers, the Aśvins, will make weal for us. They should keep defect away from here. – Failures away!
## 9
Agni will make weal with his fires; let the sun blaze weal for us.
Let wind, without defect, blow weal. – Failures away!
## 10
Away affliction, away failure—drive away bad thought.
O Ādityas, keep us from narrow straits.
## 11
Keep the arrow from us, Ādityas, and thoughtlessness.
Set hostility aside, o you possessed of all possessions.
## 12
O Ādityas, extend to us the shelter that will free
even the sinful from his sin, o you of good gifts.
## 13
Whatever mortal seeks to harm us with demonry,
that man should harm his own lifetime by his own devices. 14. Evil will get the defaming, cheating mortal
who, full of evil rage, is double-dealing right here in our midst.
## 15
You are in the midst of simple folk, o gods: you know the mortal in  their hearts—
both the one who is double-dealing right here and the one who isn’t, o  good ones.
## 16
We would choose the shelter of the mountains and of the waters. O Heaven and Earth, put defect at a distance from us.
## 17
You, o good ones—with your beneficial shelter as a boat
carry us to the far shore, beyond all difficulties.
## 18
For the sake of progeny and posterity make for us a longer lifetime  to live,
o very great Ādityas.
## 19
There is a sacrifice closer to you than your anger, Ādityas. Have mercy! Only in you do we abide—in your kinship.
## 20
The Maruts’ lofty defense, the god Rescuer, the Aśvins,
Mitra and Varuṇa—(all of them) do we beg for our well-being.
## 21
O Mitra, Aryaman, and Varuṇa, o Maruts—your faultless, manly,  praiseworthy
protection providing threefold defense—extend that to us.
## 22
For even though we are men, whose kinsman is death, o Ādityas, extend our lifetime for us to live.
The next four hymns (VIII.19–22) are attributed to Sobhari Kāṇva by the  Anukramaṇī and are dedicated to Agni (VIII.19, 37 verses), the Maruts (VIII.20,  26 verses), Indra (VIII.21, 18 verses), and the Aśvins (VIII.22, 18 verses). Sobhari  addresses himself in every hymn but VIII.21.