+++
title = "019"

+++
19 (639)
Agni (1–33), Ādityas (34–35), Trasadasyu’s Dānastuti  (36–37)
Sobhari Kāṇva
37 verses: 1–26, 28–33 pragātha strophes of kakubh (8 12 8) and satobr̥hatī (12 8 12  8), except dvipadā virāj 27, uṣṇih 34, satobr̥hatī 35, kakubh 36, paṅkti 37
Save for VI.16 with its 48 verses, this is the longest hymn dedicated to Agni in  the R̥gveda, but unlike the composite VI.16, this hymn shows clear signs of unity.  This unity is evident (though more clearly in the Sanskrit) in the constant recy cling and recombination of vocabulary, especially the lexicon related to sacrifice.  Thematically the hymn focuses on Agni’s role in the sacrifice and on mortals’ tasks1064 VIII.19
in helping him fulfill that role. Numerous verses promise the favor and aid of Agni  to the mortal who properly serves the fire (see, e.g., vss. 5–6, 9–14).
This reciprocal relationship between the god Agni and mortal men and Agni’s  mediating position between gods and men provide other themes in the hymn. The  first verses (1–4) emphasize Agni’s divine nature even while sketching his role as  the Hotar parallel to mortal priests and chosen by them (esp. vs. 3ab), but this  equivocal position of Agni is explored differently later in the hymn. Verse 24 again  puts heavy emphasis on the fact that Agni is a god and immortal and also the  Hotar acting for and established by men, but here he seems to be acting almost  like a mortal himself—seeking the rewards of the sacrifice like a human priest.  This subtle role shift leads to a more explicit and otherwise unthinkable one in the  next verses (25–27), where the poet imagines himself as the god and Agni as his  mortal server and claims that he, the poet, would act beneficently. (For a similar  role reversal but with Indra and his mortal worshiper, see nearby VIII.14.) This  flight of fancy ends quickly, and the proper relations between man and god are  restored in verse 28.
The hymn also has a political agenda, coming to a climax in verses 32–33, but  foreshadowed at various places earlier in the hymn. In verse 32 the poet announces  that he and his fellows have come to the fire belonging to the great king Trasadasyu,  the fire on which all other fires are dependent (vs. 33). As Proferes convincingly  argues (2007: 33–34 and passim), the fire represents the king’s sovereignty and is  depicted as being made up of the fires of the individual peoples who give allegiance  to the king, the brilliance belonging to each of these peoples being brought together  in a team. Agni is thus not only the mediator positioned between men and gods, but  also among different groups of men, and in both cases he is chosen for the role, put  in that position, by men acting voluntarily.
The model of the sacrifice as reciprocal action and responsibility provides an  implicit model for the state. As noted above, earlier parts of the hymn hint at  what is to come. In verse 7 the poet hopes that his group can use their fires to  provide good fire for an unidentified plural “you”—quite possibly the larger pol
ity. The plural “fires” is significant: though in ritual context it can easily be taken  as referring to the three fires on the ritual ground, in a political reading it can  represent the dependent fires of verse 33. The next verse (8) refers to Agni as “a  guest associated with alliance” (átithiḥ . . .mitríyaḥ). Again in ritual context this  refers to the god’s presence as guest in the house of a mortal and the alliance  between gods and men thus effected, but in a political reading the alliance is the  banding together of the peoples under Trasadasyu represented by Trasadasyu’s  fire. In verse 14 we find the curious and syntactically unusual expression “who will  piously offer boundlessness throughout the domains.” The word “boundlessness”  is áditi, usually used as the name of the goddess Aditi, mother of the Ādityas,  but more easily interpreted as a common noun here. Again, in a ritual context  it may mean that the ritual ground is equivalent to the whole world and thus  unbounded, but in a political context it may refer to the erasure of boundaries among the peoples who give allegiance to Trasadasyu and his fire. It may also  indirectly promise the favor of the Ādityas, the gods who oversee the relationships  among men, to the men who subscribe to this allegiance. The principal Ādityas,  Varuṇa, Mitra, and Aryaman (as well as Bhaga), show up in verse 16, and already  Agni was said to be Mitraic (/associated with alliance) in verse 8 (see also vs.  25). It is surely significant that the two verses following the climactic declaration  about Trasadasyu’s sovereign fire (vss. 34–35) are dedicated to the Ādityas, specifi
cally Varuṇa, Mitra, and Aryaman. The final two verses (36–37) are a brief and  uncomplex dānastuti of Trasadasyu.
It is hoped that this introduction gives some sense of the richness and intricate  interconnections of this hymn; much more could be said.
## 1
Praise him who possesses solar glory. The gods have run to the god, the  spoked wheel (of the sacrifice).
They have conducted the oblation among the gods.
## 2
Reverently invoke him of extensive generosity, o inspired poet—Agni of  brilliant flame, the guider
of this ritual offering of soma, o Sobhari. (Bring him) forth as the
foremost for the ceremony.
## 3
We have chosen you, the best sacrificer, a god, an immortal, as Hotar  among the gods—
(you,) very effective for this sacrifice,
## 4
The child of nourishment, providing good fortune and good light, Agni  of fairest flame.
He will win for us by sacrifice in heaven the favor of Mitra and Varuṇa  and that of the waters in heaven.
## 5
The mortal who by kindling, who by pouring, who by knowledge  performs pious service to Agni, and
who conducts good ceremonies with reverence,
## 6
It is his steeds that speed swiftly, his glory that is most brilliant,
and no anxiety, whether god-made or mortal-made, will reach him from  anywhere.
## 7
With our fires might we provide good fire to (all of) you [=assembled  peoples]. O son of strength, o lord of nourishment,
kindly disposed toward us, you provide good heroes.
## 8
Being lauded like a guest associated with our alliance, Agni is worth  acquiring like a chariot.
Peaceful ways that bring success abide in you: you are king of riches.
## 9
The mortal who conducts pious ceremonies in the stipulated way, he is to  be lauded, o Agni, you who provide good fortune.
Let him be a winner with his insights—

## 10
The one for whose ceremony you stand erect, he, controlling heroes,  achieves success—
and (let) him (be) a winner with his steeds, and with his extollers; a  winner of the stake with his champions.
## 11
The one in whose house the wondrous form Agni, possessing all  desirable things, should take delight in the praise song
or in the oblations, while he [=Agni] keeps laboring at his labors, 12. Or in the gifts of the inspired praiser who is quickest, o youthful (son)  of strength.
make his speech, when he has found it, one that brings the gods below  and is above (that of) mortals, o good one.
## 13
Who seeks to attract Agni here with the giving of oblations, or (seeks to  attract) the very skillful one with acts of reverence,
or him of nimble flame with song,
## 14
Who with kindling and with sharpening (of it [=fire]) piously offers  boundlessness throughout his [=Agni’s] domains,
that mortal, provided with good fortune, will cross over all things  and (all) peoples with his insights and his brilliance, as if through  the water.
## 15
O Agni, bring here the brilliance that will overpower any devourer in  his seat
and the battle fury of the ill-intentioned man.
## 16
(The brilliance) by which Varuṇa, Mitra, and Aryaman see, by which  the Nāsatyas and Bhaga,
in that (brilliance) of yours might we receive ritual shares, (becoming)  the best pathfinders by your power, helped (also) by you, Indra.
## 17
It is those of good intention who have installed you who provide the  sight for men, o Agni, o inspired one—
the inspired priests (have installed you) as the very effective one, o god. 18. Just those (have made) the altar, o you of good fortune, they the poured  offering; they have made the soma-pressing (to be) in heaven.
Just those have won the great stake along with its prizes who set their  desire down in you.
## 19
Auspicious is Agni when he is bepoured; auspicious is our gift,  auspicious our ceremony, o you who provide good fortune,
and auspicious our lauds.
## 20
Set your auspicious mind on the overcoming of obstacles, the mind  with which you will be overpowering in battles.
Loosen the sturdy (bows) of those that are greatly defiant. Might we  win with your superior powers. 21. With my hymn I reverently invoke the one established by Manu, the  circle of spokes whom the gods have set down as their messenger,
the best sacrificer, who carries the oblations.
## 22
To the sharp-fanged one, the ruler of tender age—to Agni do you sing  delight,
Agni who adorns his mass of heroes with his liberal gifts, when he is  bepoured with ghee.
## 23
When, bepoured with ghee, Agni bears his axe up and down,
like a (rich) lord (he bears [=wears]) his cloak [=ghee].
## 24
Who, the god established by Manu [/man], set the oblations in motion  with his sweet-smelling mouth—
he seeks to win desirable things for himself as the Hotar who conducts  ceremonies well, (though he is also) an immortal god.
## 25
If, Agni, you were mortal and I were immortal—o you with the might  of Mitra,
o son of strength bepoured (with ghee)—
## 26
I would not give you over to the curse, o good one, nor to evil, o my  companion.
My praiser would not be in want nor ill-established, Agni, nor in an  evil way,
## 27
But well kept here in my dwelling, like a son in that of his father. Let  our oblation go forth to the gods!
## 28
Might I always keep company with your help that is so very nearby, o  Agni, at your pleasure, o good one—
I a mortal, (with that) of a god.
## 29
With your will may I win, with your gifts, with your lauds, o Agni. They say that just you are solicitude for me, o good one. O Agni, be
aroused to give.
## 30
He advances himself through your help well provided with heroes and  bringing prizes—
(the man) whose companionship you will choose.
## 31
Your drop [=spark], accompanied by dark [=smoke], bellowing as it  is kindled at the right ritual moment, has taken, o you who desire
to win.
You are dear to the great dawns; you rule [/shine] through the nights  and at the dawns.
## 32
We, the Sobhari, have come to the one possessing a thousand testicles,  well provided with superior power, for his help,
the sovereign king, (the fire) belonging to Trasadasyu—

## 33
You, o Agni, on whom the other fire are dependent, like branches (on  a tree).
I team up the brilliant glories of the peoples as (poets team up) inspired  poems, while I strengthen your powers to rule.
## 34
O you Ādityas without deceit—the mortal whom you lead to the  far shore—
you who are the best givers among all the generous—
## 35
Any (man) holding power throughout the sons of Manu—you kings  who conquer territories—
might we be those to you, o Varuṇa, Mitra, and Aryaman; might we  alone be the charioteers of truth.
## 36
Trasadasyu, the son of Purukutsa, has given me five hundred brides— the lord of settlements who is most munificent to his compatriot.
## 37
And, at the source of the (River) Suvāstu, the dusky (horse) of Prayiyu,  of Vayiyu,
became the leader of thrice seventy (cows) for me. Good is the lord
of gifts.