+++
title = "020"

+++
20 (640)
Maruts
Sobharī Kāṇva
26 verses: kakubh alternating with satobr̥hatī, arranged in pragāthas
The typical Marut themes are deftly woven together in this hymn. After inviting  them to the sacrifice (vss. 1–2), the poet first describes the effects in nature of the  storm they embody (vss. 3–6) and then their flashy beauty and that of their chariot  (vss. 7–12), ending this section with two verses (13–14) on their lack of individuality  (see also vs. 21). The remainder of the hymn concerns the generosity of the Maruts  and begs them to display it in response to Sobhari’s hymn: the poet addresses him
self in verses 19–20. Unlike the generic gifts generally asked for in R̥gvedic hymns,  the final verses make it clear that the poet has a specific request: Marut medicine to  heal the afflicted (vss. 23–26). Their association with healing comes through their  father Rudra.
The hymn exhibits a light touch and has a number of neat turns of phrase—for  instance, verse 8, where “the music of the Sobharis is anointed with cows” indicates  that their hymn reaps a bovine reward from the patron, or verse 19, with its pun on  the participle cárkr̥ṣat meaning both “plowing” and “celebrating.”
## 1
Come here; don’t mean harm. Setting out, don’t stay away, o you of  equal spirit,
who are able to bow even the fixed things. 2. With your (chariots) whose wheel-rims are firm, with your very bright  lights—o Maruts, masters of the R̥bhus, o Rudras—
with refreshment come here to us today, here to the sacrifice, seeking  the Sobharis, o you who are craved by many.
## 3
For we know the mighty forcefulness of the Rudrian Maruts, the  strenuous ones,
of quick Viṣṇu, of the ones who grant rewards.
## 4
The islands keep flying further apart; misfortune stands still; they  [=Maruts] yoke both world-halves.
The wasteplaces rise forth, when you stir (them), o you self-radiant
ones with beautiful bangles.
## 5
(When you stir) even the unshakeable things on your drive, the
mountains and the lord of the forest keep resounding.
The earth trembles at your journeys.
## 6
To allow your onslaught to drive by, o Maruts, heaven raises itself  higher aloft,
when the men, strong in arm, keep putting their energies on display on  their own bodies.
## 7
According to their nature, following their beauty, the men—greatly  vibrant, impetuous, bullish in breath,
unobstructed in breath—drive themselves.
## 8
The music of the Sobharis is anointed with cows. Onto the chariot, into  the golden (chariot) cask
(come) those well-born (Maruts), akin to a cow [=Pr̥śni], (for us) to
enjoy nourishment; the great ones (come here) now for us to gain.
## 9
O you who rain unguents, present oblations to your own bullish  Marutian troop
whose leader is a bull [=Indra].
## 10
O Maruts, with your chariot with its bullish horses, bullish breath,  bullish wheel-naves,
come here at will, like winged falcons, to pursue our oblations, o men.
## 11
Common to them (all) is their unguent; their brilliants glint on
their arms.
Their spears keep flashing.
## 12
These mighty bulls with mighty arms do not arrange (such things just)  on their bodies:
taut bows and weapons are on your chariots, beauties on your faces.
## 13
Of them whose name is vibrant and widespread like a flood, there is just  one (name) for each and every one of them to enjoy.
Their might is like the life force of their fathers.

## 14
Extol these Maruts; praise them. For of these boisterous ones, as of wheel-spokes, there is no last one. This is so as to their giving; as  to their greatness is this so.
## 15
Very fortunate is he who was amid your forms of help at earlier  dawnings, o Maruts,
or who will be also now.
## 16
Or the prize-seeker whose oblations you come here to pursue, o men. He will attain to your favors, you shakers, along with brilliant things  and the winning of prizes.
## 17
Just as they wish, so shall it be—they,
the sons of Rudra, lord of heaven, the ritual adepts, the youths,
## 18
The Maruts of good drops who deserve (the soma-drink) and who go  about practicing generosity all together.
With a better heart even than this [=usual generosity], o youths, turn  yourselves hither toward us.
## 19
To the youths, to the bulls, the pure ones, sing with your newest hymn, o  Sobhari,
like a plowman to his cows [/celebrating (the Maruts) like cows].
## 20
Those who are victorious like a fist-fighter, to be invoked in all contests,  among (all) Hotars,
those, like lustrous bulls, receiving the most praises—extol them with a  hymn: the Maruts, yes!
## 21
Cows also, likewise akin through common birth, o Maruts of equal  spirit,
lick each other’s humps.
## 22
The mortal also will draw near to brotherhood with you, you dancers  with brilliants on your breasts.
Take note of us, Maruts, for your firmly founded friendship exists  always.
## 23
O Maruts of good drops, convey here to us (some) of your Marut  medicine,
you comrades in the span.
## 24
Those with which you aid the Sindhu, with which you triumph, with  which you favor Krivi,
with those kindly forms of help be a joy to us, you who are joy itself,  you who do not partner hatred.
## 25
O Maruts possessing good ritual grass—what medicine is in the Sindhu,  what in the Asiknī, what in the seas,
what in the mountains, 26. Seeing it, you carry it all on your bodies. With it intercede for us. To ground (should go) the malady of the afflicted; make what has gone  awry right again.