+++
title = "021"

+++
21 (641)
Indra (1–16), Citra’s Dānastuti (17–18)
Sobhari Kāṇva
18 verses: kakubh alternating with satobr̥hatī, arranged in pragāthas
This hymn ends with a brief dānastuti to king Citra (vss. 17–18) and begins with a  pun on his name: in verse 1 Indra is described as citrá “brilliant.” In between the  poet ponders the various different relationships that he and his people might have  with Indra, deploying a surprising range of terminology: “comrade” (vss. 2, 8, 14,  15), “kin” (vs. 4), “rival” (vs. 13), “friend” (vs. 13), and “father” (vs. 14). Amid the  standard invitations to the soma sacrifice (e.g., vss. 3, 5) and praise of Indra’s quali
ties (e.g., vs. 10), the poet depicts himself and his people as previously deprived of  Indra (vs. 7), but as possessing hopes and visions of the god’s entering into rela tionship with them (see esp. vs. 6), and he imagines what they could achieve if this  relationship were activated (vss. 11–12). The stress on the 1st plural “we” (including  Indra along with the mortals) and on “our” states of mind is highly unusual in  R̥gvedic poetry.
The poet’s conception of possible relationships develops in even more unpredict able ways toward the end of the hymn. The pragātha strophe consisting of verses  13–14 begins strikingly by calling Indra friendless, and continues in verse 14 with a  brief and idiosyncratic characterization of some who don’t have relationships with  Indra. The following pragātha (vss. 15–16) urges “us” not to miss our own chance  with Indra, with a noteworthy comparison of “our” potentially damaging lack of  activity to that of aging spinsters.
Thus, though much of the hymn contains conventional Indra-hymn material,  there is a distinct “psychological” tinge to the poet’s depiction of the interaction of  his group with Indra. This depiction of an emotional bond between the worshipers  and the deity makes the abrupt transition to the dānastuti all the more surprising,  especially because the dānastuti seems to belittle Indra’s giving in comparison to  King Citra’s.
## 1
O you without precedent—we, seeking help like people carrying
something massive,
call upon you, the brilliant, in the prize contest.
## 2
That powerful youth of ours—in his daring—strode right up to you for  help in action,
for it is just you that we, your comrades, have chosen as the helper who  brings gain, o Indra.

## 3
Drive here. Here are the drops, o lord of horses, lord of cows, lord of  fields.
Drink the soma, soma-lord.
## 4
Because we inspired poets without (such) kin hold fast to you who have  (those [=horses, etc.] as kin, o Indra,
come here with all of them, which are your deposits, to drink the soma,  o bull.
## 5
Like birds (in a tree), sitting by your exhilarating, strengthening honey  prepared with cows,
we keep bellowing to you, o Indra.
## 6
When we address you with this homage, will you hesitate even for a  moment?
Here are desires, and you are the giver, o possessor of the fallow bays.  Here are we; here are our visions.
## 7
Only recently have we come together with your help, Indra, for  previously, o master of the stones,
we have not known your abundance.
## 8
We (now) know your comradeship and sustenance, o champion. We beg  these of you, o wielder of the mace.
And so make us sharp, good one, whenever a prize of cattle is (at  stake), o you of beautiful lips.
## 9
Who previously led us to this better state right here, him shall I praise  on your behalf,
o comrades, for his help—Indra,
## 10
Possessor of the fallow bays, lord of settlements, conquering territories.  Because as ever it is he who has reached exhilaration,
the bounteous one will pursue for us, his praisers, a hundred in cattle  and horses.
## 11
Surely with you as our yokemate, o bull, we could talk back to the snorter at the concourse of the people possessing cattle.
## 12
As decisive actors, we could be victorious in the decisive action, o  much-invoked one; we could stand up to those of evil vision.
With our superior men we could smash the obstacle [/Vr̥tra] and swell  with strength. O Indra, you have pursued our visions.
## 13
You are without rival, but by the same token, without friend, Indra, by  birth and from of old.
Only in battle do you seek friendship.
## 14
You never take on a rich man for companionship. The booze-fueled  revile you.
When you make your roar, you just shove (them all) together. It is  because of that that you are called on like a father. 15. When we are in companionship with one such as you, Indra, let us not,  like foolish (spinsters) who grow old at home,
(just) sit still when (the soma) has been pressed.
## 16
Let us not miss out on your largesse, you whose gift is cattle. Indra, let  us not complain about you.
Seize hold of even the firmly fixed (goods) of the stranger and bring  them here. Those who receive your gifts are not to be swindled.
## 17
Is it Indra (who gives) so great a bounty, or well-portioned Sarasvatī who gives the goods?
Or is it you, o Citra, (who give) to the pious man?
## 18
Citra is the only king; the other petty little ones who (live) along the  Sarasvatī are only kinglets—
for like Parjanya with rain, he will thunder [/stretch forth] as he gives a  thousand ten thousands.