+++
title = "022"

+++
22 (642) Aśvins
Sobhari Kāṇva
18 verses: br̥hatī alternating with satobr̥hatī 1–7; anuṣṭubh 8; kakubh alternating with  satobr̥hatī 9–10, 13–18; kakubh 11; madhyejyotis 12, all arranged in pragāthas.
The metrical complexity of this hymn is not matched by corresponding complexity  of content. The hymn focuses especially on the chariot of the Aśvins, as well as on  their journey to us, the sacrifice with which we will welcome them, and the multi form aid we hope for in return.
Nonetheless there are a few striking images and turns of phrase, particularly in  verse 6 where the Aśvins “plow barley with a wolf,” an expression that cannot be sep arated from the similar one in I.117.21, likewise an Aśvin hymn, where they “scatter  barley with a wolf.” Starting with Yaska (6.26), the “wolf” has regularly been identi fied as a type of plow, though this recourse to agricultural technology could be taken  as a reductive attempt to explain away the wondrous nature of the Aśvins’ feats—here  perhaps their ability to harness the power of a dangerous and semi-wild beast for a  civilizing task. On the wolf as a cross-category in the Vedic conceptual universe, situ ated between the wild and the civilized and partaking of both, see Jamison (2008b).
## 1
I have called here this most wondrous chariot for help today,
the one that you mounted for Sūryā, o Aśvins easy to call, you who
follow the course of the Rudras [=Maruts]—
## 2
(The chariot) that is first to bring prosperity [?], that is easy to call,  eagerly sought by many, enjoyable, first in the prize-contests,
accompanied by favors, free of hatred, and without fault, o Sobhari.1074 VIII.22
## 3
These two gods who most often appear in many places, the Aśvins— with our acts of reverence
may we bring them here nearby for help: they go to the house of the  pious man.
## 4
One wheel of your chariot speeds around; the other, (though) at rest,  drives you onward.
Let your favor run to us here, like a cow (to its calf), o lords of beauty.
## 5
Your chariot with its three chariot-boxes and golden reins, o Aśvins, the famous one that busily circles around heaven and earth—with that,  come here, o Nāsatyas.
## 6
Rendering service to Manu, early in the day you plow barley with a wolf. O Aśvins, lords of beauty, today we would praise you together with  your favors.
## 7
O you whose goods are prizewinning mares, drive right up to us along  the paths of truth,
along which you spur Tr̥kṣi, son of Trasadasyu, for great sovereignty,  o bulls.
## 8
Here is the soma pressed for you with stones, o you men with  bullish goods.
Drive here to drink the soma; drink it in the house of the pious man.
## 9
Ascend onto the chariot, into the golden (chariot-)cask, o Aśvins with  bullish goods,
and so hitch up refreshments rich in fat.
## 10
With those (forms of help) with which you help Paktha, with which  Adhrigu, with which Babhru deprived of pleasure,
with these come to us right away and swiftly, o Aśvins. Heal what is ailing.
## 11
When we Adhrigus call upon the Aśvins, the two Adhrigu [/who are not  poor], at this very time of day—
we expressing admiration with our hymns—
## 12
With those (forms of help) drive here, o bulls, right to my call, which  brings all good things and all that is worth desiring—
(drive here) with refreshment, as the most bounteous ones who most  often appear in many places—with those (forms of help) with which  they [=the Maruts?] strengthened Krivi, with those come here.
## 13
To these two at this very time of the days, to these Aśvins do I appeal,  celebrating them,
and these two do we beseech with our acts of reverence—
## 14
Just these two in the evening, these two lords of beauty at dawn, and  these two who follow the course of the Rudras [=Maruts] on their  journey. Don’t look over and beyond us to a cheating mortal, o Rudras whose  goods are prizewinning mares.
## 15
In the early morning I call their easily moving (chariot) to move easily  here, or (rather I call) the overpowering Aśvins along with their
chariot—
I, Śobharī, like a father.
## 16
With (your chariot) swift as thought, o bulls roused to exuberance, with  your forms of help that come quickly,
even from far away come to be here for our help with your many (forms  of help), you who bring many benefits.
## 17
O Aśvins, you superior men who are first to drink the honey, to us here  drive your course providing horses,
cattle, and gold, o wondrous ones.
## 18
An abundance of good heroes, of good standing and well in advance,  desirable, unassailable by the demonic,
and all things of value might we acquire at this journey of yours, o you  whose goods are prize mares.
The next small collection of hymns (VIII.23–26) is attributed to Viśvamanas  Vaiyaśva, with hymns to Agni (VIII.23), Indra (VIII.24), Mitra and Varuṇa  (VIII.25), and the Aśvins and Vāyu (VIII.26). The names Vyaśva and its patro nymic Vaiyaśva occur several times in these hymns, as does the name of the patron  (Varo) Suṣāman, and the hymns are also characterized by the almost exclusive use  of the uṣṇih meter (8 8 12). See Oldenberg (1888: 211–13).