+++
title = "023"

+++
23 (643) Agni
Viśvamanas Vaiyaśva
30 verses: uṣṇih, arranged in trcas ̥
The poet begins the hymn by urging himself to perform his sacrificial tasks (vss.  1–2ab), ending this little section with vocatives addressed to himself but seem ingly designed to identify himself with his divine target Agni: “belonging to all  domains” is often an epithet of Agni (as well as of Indra) and “having all in  mind” (viśvámanas) could be a divine descriptor. However, at least according to  the Anukramaṇī, it is the poet’s own name, and he then (vs. 2c) speaks in his own  1st-person voice. This interactive quality is prominent throughout the hymn. The  poet’s self-address returns in verse 24, and in between he also addresses in the 2nd person plural the assembled priests and worshipers, on whose behalf he is work ing (vss. 7–9; see esp. 9a, where he calls them “seekers of the truth”). (On poetic  self-address see Jamison 2009a.) Agni’s role in this social context, as clanlord of

clans, is also emphasized (vss. 10, 13–14, 20). Manu, the mythical founder of the  larger Ārya sacrificial community known as the “descendants of Manu,” is also  duly remembered (vss. 13, 17, 25–26), as are the mythical seer Uśanā Kāvya (vs.  17) and the poet’s immediate ancestor, the seer Vyaśva (vss. 16, 23), whose devo
tion to Agni and lucrative relationship with his patron, Ukṣan, merit mention and  provide a model for Vaiyaśva’s own gentle hint to his patron Varo Suṣāman (vs.  28). Thus the poet situates his praise of the god and his requests to him in a web of  social relations and mutual dependency pertaining both in the current time and in  the long history of the descendants of Manu.
Both the praise and the requests follow the common tropes of the genre, though  often nicely executed. The focus is on Agni as the messenger of the gods and as  the carrier of our oblations to them. Some of the tr̥cas show thematic or syntactic  unity (e.g., vss. 13–15 against demons and cheats), but the tr̥ca structure is not  prominent, and there are bridges across tr̥cas (e.g., the messenger theme in vss.  18–19).
## 1
Reverently invoke him to receive (our offerings); sacrifice to Jātavedas, possessing curling smoke and flames that cannot be grasped,
## 2
To Agni the giver, with your hymn, o you common to all domains, who  have all in mind [/Viśvamanas (=the poet)].
And I shall praise the competitors [=flames], (drivers) of chariots,
## 3
Whose onward thrust, worthy of verses, (aims) to seize refreshments and  nourishments.
By close searching the driver [=Agni] finds the goods.
## 4
His flame has stood up and outward, the unaging flame of the
shining one,
of the very bright one of scorching fang, the glory of a warrior band. 5. Stand up with your divine body while you are being praised, o you who  conduct good ceremonies,
with your gaze (on us), blazing with your lofty radiance.
## 6
O Agni, drive (to the gods) with our good lauds, pouring oblations in  yourself in the proper sequence,
as you have become our oblation-carrying messenger.
## 7
I call upon Agni on your behalf, the foremost Hotar of the settled  domains.
I shall hymn him with this speech, and I shall praise him for you all,
## 8
Him of unerring will, whom, together with his body, they sweeten with  their sacrifices,
him, like an ally, well established among the people who abide in truth. 9. O you (people) who seek truth—in him abiding in truth, bringing success  to the sacrifice with our hymn,
in him do they [=the gods] take pleasure, in the footprint of our homage. 10. Let our sacrifices come in unbroken sequence here to the best of the  Aṅgirases,
who is the most glorious Hotar here among the clans.
## 11
O unaging Agni, these (flames) of yours, being kindled as lofty light, are displaying their power like bullish horses.
## 12
O lord of nourishments, give us wealth with an abundance of heroes. Further us in combats when progeny and posterity are at stake.
## 13
When the clanlord, whetted, is well pleased in the clan of Manu,
Agni repels all demonic powers.
## 14
O Agni, in harkening to my new praise song, you clanlord and hero, with your searing heat burn down the wily demons.
## 15
Not by any wile should a cheating mortal be master of him
who offers ritual service to Agni with gifts of oblations.
## 16
The seer Vyaśva, seeking bulls [/Ukṣan (=his patron)], pleased you, the  finder of goods.
For great wealth might we kindle you.
## 17
Uśanā Kāvya set you down as Hotar—
you to win (goods) by sacrifice for Manu as Jātavedas.
## 18
Because all the gods, altogether, made you their messenger,
by harkening (to them), o god, you became the first one worthy of the  sacrifice.
## 19
This same immortal should the mortal, the hero, make his messenger— the pure one of extensive power whose course is black.
## 20
With ladles extended, we would call upon him of good radiance and  blazing flame,
the unaging and ancient Agni, to be invoked by the clans.
## 21
The mortal who has dedicated a poured offering with gifts of
oblations to him
receives abundant prosperity and glory in heroes.
## 22
(It goes) first toward Agni Jātavedas, foremost at the sacrifices— the ladle full of the oblation goes with homage.
## 23
Like Vyaśva, we would do honor to Agni with these most distinguished  (thoughts),
to him of blazing flame with most munificent thoughts.
## 24
Now chant to him of extensive power with praise songs like sturdy  posts [/like Sthūrayūpa],
o seer, son of Vyaśva—to the Agni of the household.
## 25
Him, the guest of the descendants of Manu, the son of the forest-lords  [=trees],
ancient Agni do the inspired priests reverently invoke for help.

## 26
Because he, the great one, is superior to all, (let) the oblations of the  descendants of Manu (also be) superior.
O Agni, sit down on the ritual grass with homage.
## 27
Win for us many desirable things. Win of the wealth eagerly sought  by many—
accompanied by good heroes, offspring, and glory.
## 28
O Agni, give the impetus to generosity to Varo Suṣāman and to his  people,
each and every one, always—o youngest good one.
## 29
For you are the furtherer. Uncover for us refreshments consisting of cows and the winning of great wealth, o Agni.
## 30
Agni, you are glorious. Convey Mitra and Varuṇa here,
the sovereign kings possessing the truth and of refined skill.