+++
title = "024"

+++
24 (644)
Indra
Viśvamanas Vaiyaśva
30 verses: uṣṇih (except anuṣṭubh 30), arranged in trcas ̥
The first twenty-seven verses of this hymn are dedicated to Indra, while the final  tr̥ca (vss. 28–30) is a dānastuti of the patron Varo Suṣāman, with Dawn the divinity  addressed because of her association with the distribution of the priestly gift. The  first two verses of the dānastuti are unexceptional in diction and tone, but the last  verse (30) contains puns and neologisms, as often in dānastutis.
The rest of the hymn contains fairly standard praise of Indra, with special  emphasis on his generosity—rā́dhas “generosity” is something of a signature word  in the hymn, occurring six times—though his powers do not go unmentioned. The  need to praise Indra to stimulate his giving is also a recurrent motif in the hymn,  and the poet calls upon both himself (sometimes by name) and his companions to  provide that praise (see, e.g., vss. 1, 14, 19, 22–23). Such interactivity was also char
acteristic of the preceding hymn (VIII.23) to Agni.
The hymn consists of tr̥cas, but there is little unity within most of these triplets;  instead, there are a number of instances of cross-tr̥ca transitions (see, e.g., vss. 3/4,  6/7, 9/10). The poet also makes considerable use of alliteration and, especially, of  pairing derivationally related words. Verse 10 provides a particularly fine example  of the latter practice.
## 1
Comrades, we direct our formulation to Indra who bears the mace— I shall praise him on your behalf—to the most manly, bold one.
## 2
For you are famed because of your swelling might and, as Vr̥tra-smasher,  because of your Vr̥tra-smashing [/obstacle-smashing].
With your bounties you outdo the bounteous ones in piety, o champion. 3. Being praised, bring here to us wealth that offers most brilliant fame— you who are exclusively the good giver, o master of the fallow bays.
## 4
Tear out what is exclusive and dear to the peoples, Indra.
Being praised, bring it here boldly, bold one.
## 5
Hindrances obstruct neither your left nor your right hand,
nor do repulsions, o master of the fallow bays, in your quests for
cattle.
## 6
I fit you out with my songs, as a pen with cows, o master of the stones. Fulfill the desire and the mind of the singer.
## 7
All these things of the one who has all in mind [/Viśvamanas
(=poet)]—o best Vr̥tra-smasher—
study them well though our insight, o forceful leader, o good one.
## 8
O Vr̥tra-smasher, o champion, might we know of this newer,
eagerly sought generosity of yours, o good one, much-invoked.
## 9
For, Indra, just as for you there exists a swelling might that cannot be  encompassed, o dancer,
your giving to the pious man cannot be impaired, o
much-invoked one.
## 10
Rain yourself down, o you who are greater than great, o best of men,  for great generosity.
Being yourself steadfast, stand fast, bounteous one, for bounteous
giving.
## 11
Never have our hopes gone to any other place than you, o master of the  stones.
Bounteous one, exert your ability for us with your help.
## 12
For surely I do not find any other than you, for generosity, o dancer, for wealth, for brilliance, and for swelling might, o you who long
for songs.
## 13
Pour here the drop for Indra: he will drink the somian honey.
He will spur himself on in his generosity and greatness.
## 14
I have addressed the lord of the fallow bays as he engorges his skill. Now listen to the son of Aśva as he praises.
## 15
For surely never before has a greater hero than you been born,
neither in wealth—not in just such a way (as you are)—nor in favor.
## 16
(Pour) right here what is more invigorating than honey, or pour,  Adhvaryu, (what is more invigorating) than the stalk,
for in this way the ever-strengthening hero is praised.
## 17
O Indra, mounter of the fallow bays, none has reached up to your  foremost praise hymn
in swelling strength nor in favor.

## 18
Seeking fame, we have called upon the lord of prizes on your behalf,  (comrades,)
upon him who is to be strengthened by unremitting sacrifices.
## 19
Come now! Comrades, let us praise Indra, the superior man worthy of  praise,
who all alone surmounts all the separate peoples.
## 20
For the heaven-ruling one who does not withhold cattle, who seeks  cattle, speak a wondrous speech,
sweeter than ghee and honey,
## 21
For him whose heroic deeds are immeasurable, whose generosity is not  to be circumscribed,
whose priestly gift surmounts everything, like light.
## 22
Like Vyaśva, praise Indra, who controls the prizewinning (horse) that  rides the wave,
liberally apportioning the property of the stranger to the pious man. 23. In just this way now, o Vaiyaśva, praise him anew [/to the nines, and  then] a tenth time—
the one who knows well, worthy to be celebrated by those who roam. 24. For you know how to avoid calamities day after day, o you with mace  in hand,
as a preener [=water bird] does snares.
## 25
Bring that help here, Indra, with which, o most wondrous one, (you are  there) for the (ritually) active man.
Once again pierce (Śuṣṇa?) for Kutsa and force (him) down.
## 26
We beg you now for a new (life?) for an older (man), o most  wondrous one.
You are victorious over all our antagonists—
## 27
(You, the one) who releases (us) from the bear and from constraint or  who (releases constraint) from the Ārya amid the seven rivers.
You have made the Dāsa’s weapon bow, o you of powerful manliness.
## 28
Just as you conveyed wealth to Varo Suṣāman for his gain
and to the Vyaśvas, o well-portioned (Dawn) rich in
prizewinning mares,
## 29
(Even so) let the priestly gift of Nārya come to the Vyaśvas, who  provide soma,
as well as substantial generosity in hundreds and thousands.
## 30
When the sacrificer will ask you: “Where (is he), you where-actor?” (you will answer:) “This ‘Vala’ [=the patron Varo Suṣāman], who is set  apart, is descending toward the Gomatī (River) [/pen full of cows].”