+++
title = "025"

+++
25 (645) Mitra and Varuṇa (1–9, 13–24) and the All Gods  (10–12)
Viśvamanas Vaiyaśva
24 verses: uṣṇih, arranged in trcas ̥
The only hymn in Maṇḍala VIII ostensibly devoted to Mitra and Varuṇa, it keeps  its focus on these two gods only during the first part of the hymn (vss. 1–9), which  celebrates them as sovereign kings possessing the truth. Starting in verse 10 other  gods join the group besought for help and protection. In particular the Sun, as a  representative of the Ādityas, is the main subject of two tr̥cas (vss. 16–21). The final  verses of the hymn (starting with vs. 19) turn their attention to the sacrificial setting.  A simile concerning the ritual fire in verse 19 serves as a transition to this scene,  and an address to the Sun in verse 21, which introduces the poet’s “benefactors,”  likewise produces a transition to the final tr̥ca (vss. 22–24), a dānastuti praising the  gift of several horses and a chariot.
Although the thematic structure of the hymn roughly tracks the arrangement  in tr̥cas, the tr̥cas do not have strong internal cohesion, and there is relatively little  verbal unity within them.
## 1
To you two, the herdsmen of all, the gods worthy of the sacrifice among  the gods,
truth-possessing and of refined skill, shall I sacrifice.
## 2
They are like two charioteers along the (home) stretch (of a
racecourse), the two allies [=mitras], Mitra and Varuṇa, who is of  strong will,
both well-born descendants from of old, whose commandments are  upheld.
## 3
Their mother, great truth-possessing Aditi, gave birth
to the two who possess all possessions, whose greatness (goes) forward to  lordship.
## 4
Great Mitra and Varuṇa, sovereign kings, gods and lords [/devas and  asuras],
truth-possessing, loudly sound their lofty truth.
## 5
The two grandsons of great strength, the sons of skill, strong-willed, possessing fat drops, dwell in the house of refreshment.
## 6
You two who control the drops, the earthly and heavenly refreshments— let your cloud-accompanied rains drift here.
## 7
The two who from lofty heaven look down upon (us) as if upon
your herds,
the truth-possessing ones were installed as sovereign kings for reverence.

## 8
Truth-possessing, strong-willed, the two took their place for sovereign  kingship.
Their commandments upheld, the rulers attained their rule.
## 9
Better even than the eye at finding the way, by means of eyesight  without motes,
even when blinking, the two attentive ones remain attentive.
## 10
And let the goddess Aditi, let the two Nāsatyas [=Aśvins] give us room; let the Maruts, whose strength has increased, give room.
## 11
You (all) of good drops—give room to our roar by day and by night. Not suffering harm, might we be accompanied by protectors.
## 12
Not suffering harm, we (sing) to Viṣṇu of good drops who does  not smite.
Listen, o River traveling your own course, (for us) to be first in your  thought.
## 13
We choose what is worth choosing, the best choice, worthy of protection, which Mitra, Varuṇa, and Aryaman protect.
## 14
And that (let) the River among the waters (grant) to us, that (grant) the  Maruts, that the Aśvins,
and Indra and Viṣṇu—the generous ones of one accord.
## 15
For these superior men strike against the hostility of any zealot, like roiling (rivers) their sharp surge.
## 16
This (Sun) here, as clanlord, gazes widely—the one (gazing) over  the many.
We proceed according to his commandments and yours [=Ādityas’]. 17. We follow the ancient accustomed ways of the one [=the Sun]  associated with the sovereign kings [=Ādityas],
the long-heard commandments of Mitra and of Varuṇa.
## 18
He who measured on every side the ends of heaven and of earth with  his ray,
he filled both world-halves with his greatness.
## 19
This Sun held up his light under the shelter of heaven,
blazing like fire when it has been kindled and bepoured.
## 20
The speech at (the place) providing a long seat [=ritual ground] gains  control over a prize rich in cattle;
it gains control over non-poisonous food for giving.
## 21
I speak this to the Sun and to both world-halves, at evening and  at dawn:
“Always rise up to us among our benefactors.”
## 22
A silvery (horse) at Ukṣaṇyāyana’s (sacrifice), a silver one at Harayāṇa’s, and a yoked chariot at Suṣāman’s—these have we gained. 23. These two are overflowing with (bounties) of horses, with fallow bays,  for me;
and the two (horses) that carry men (are overflowing) with those that  get results.
## 24
With my newest inspired thought I have gained two altogether, along  with their reins and with their whips,
two chargers great at the winning of prizes.