+++
title = "026"

+++
26 (646)
Aśvins (1–19), Vāyu (20–25)
Viśvamanas Vaiyaśva or Vyaśva Āṅgirasa
25 verses: uṣṇih, except gāyatrī 16–19, 21, 25 and anuṣṭubh 20, arranged in trcas, with ̥ an extra verse, 19, at the end of the Aśvin sequence
A long and rather repetitive hymn. The first nineteen verses are dedicated to the Aśvins  and, as usual, urge them to drive their chariot to our sacrifice and to give us goods in  return. There is little novel to capture the audience; the most striking image is found in  verse 13: the unnamed god Agni, dressed in sacrifices like a bride in her wedding finery.
The final six verses belong to Vāyu, deified Wind, another god associated with  the early-morning sacrifice, who receives the first soma drink there. He too is called  to make the journey to our sacrifice and reward us for our offerings. He is twice (vss.  21, 22)  designated as the son-in-law of Tvaṣṭar, the fashioner god—a somewhat  surprising identification, given the tangled marital situation of Tvaṣṭar’s daughter  as tantalizingly sketched in X.17.1–2—where Vāyu is not in the picture.
## 01
I call your chariot for joint praise among our patrons,
o you of invincible skill, you bulls who bring bullish goods.
## 02
O Nāsatyas, to Varo Suṣāman for his great extension
do you drive with your help, you bulls who bring bullish goods.
## 03
We call you today with our oblations, you who bring prizewinning mares  as goods,
as you become refreshed on the many refreshments beyond the nights.
## 04
Let your famed chariot, the best conveyor, drive here, o Aśvins,
superior men.
(Then) you shall look closely at the praise songs of the powerful one for  splendor.
## 05
Even as you follow your meandering course, you should turn your mind  here, o Aśvins, who bring bullish goods,
for (then) you two, o Rudras, shall deliver (us) beyond hatreds.
## 06
For you two wondrous ones fly around the whole (world) in proper  sequence with your prompt (horses),
as those who quicken our insight, as the honey-colored lords of beauty.1084 VIII.26
## 07
Drive right up to us, o Aśvins, together with all-prospering wealth, as unbudgeable bounteous ones, bringing good heroes.
## 08
You two—come here to receive this (offering) of mine, Indra and  Nāsatyas—
as two gods joined in greatest delight with the gods today.
## 09
Because we call upon you, (we) seeking bulls like Vyaśva seeking Ukṣan  (his patron),
come here with your favors, o inspired poets.
## 10
Praise the Aśvins, o seer. Surely they will listen to your call
and burn up the niggards very nearby?
## 11
Listen to the son of Vyaśva, you two superior men, and you will know  of this (offering) of mine,
as two of one accord, (you and) Varuṇa, Mitra, and Aryaman.
## 12
O holy ones, out of what is given by you and what is brought by you, do your best for me along with my patrons day after day, o bulls.
## 13
The one who is swathed in sacrifices for you, like a bride in her  (wedding) dress—
serving (him [=Agni]), the Aśvins have made (him) to be beautiful— 14. (Agni,) who will watch over your (circuit) of broadest extent, protective  of men.
Drive around your circuit, seeking us.
## 15
For us drive your circuit protective of men, you who bring
bullish goods.
As if mounting (a chariot) facing many directions, you have conveyed  the sacrifice with our hymn.
## 16
Our praise song, best of calls at conveying, calls you as our  messenger, o men.
Let it be for you, o Aśvins.
## 17
Whether you find exhilaration yonder in the flood of heaven or in the  house of refreshment,
listen just to me, immortal ones.
## 18
And this one, driving brightly, best of rivers at conveying,
the Sindhu River with her golden track—
## 19
Together with this good praise and bright insight
do you travel, o Aśvins driving beautifully.
## 20
Yoke the two that power the chariot; team up the two flourishing  (horses), o good one.
After that, drink our honey, o Vāyu; come to our pressings.
## 21
O Vāyu, unerring lord of truth, son-in-law of Tvaṣṭar—yours are the forms of help we choose. 22. The son-in-law of Tvaṣṭar, the lord of wealth, do we beseech for  wealth—
as the people who provide the pressed soma (we beseech) Vāyu for
brilliant things.
## 23
Kindly Vāyu, journey here from heaven. Drive your good horse-flesh; drive from great (heaven) the two broad-winged (horses) at the chariot. 24. For we call you to the seats of men (to be) the first to attain delight (as we call) the horse-backed pressing stone—(call you) along with your  munificence.
## 25
O god Vāyu, as the first to find exhilaration with your mind,
make prizes, waters, and insights for us.
The next group of hymns (27–31) is attributed to Manu Vaivasvata and consists of  four hymns to the All Gods, followed by a very interesting praise of the Sacrificer  and his Wife, the only direct mention of this latter figure in the R̥gveda. On the  group see Oldenberg (1888: 215).