+++
title = "027"

+++
27 (647)
All Gods
Manu Vaivasvata
22 verses: br̥hatī alternating with satobr̥hatī, arranged in pragāthas
This hymn to the All Gods falls roughly into three parts on the basis of the gods  addressed. The first eight verses contain a number of named gods, whose associa tions seem random, rather than ordered into the usual functional groups—with, for  example, the Maruts mentioned next to the Ādityas, singly or jointly, or to Agni.  In contrast to this jumble of divine names, the middle section (vss. 9–14) mentions  no gods except Savitar (vs. 12), and he is in service of the unnamed plural “you”  used of the gods as a corporate entity. The unity and superimposability of the vari ous gods in this section is made clear in verses 13–14. The final section (vss. 15–22)  mentions only the Ādityas, though in fact they appear only in verses 15, 17, and 22.
Despite these differences in divine address, the hymn is unified by its concerns,  especially the desire for protection and shelter offered by the gods (see, e.g., vss. 4,  9, 20), and by its vocabulary—in particular the epithet viśvá-vedas “affording all  possessions” (vss. 2, 4, 11, 19, 20, 21) or, according to others, “having all knowledge,  which is a near phonological match to víśve devā́ḥ “All Gods,” to whom the hymn is  dedicated. The ritual context is also very much present in the hymn.
On the basis of verse 12 and the sketch of Savitar’s functions there, Geldner  suggests that this is an evening hymn. But later in the hymn the poet insistently  mentions various times of day (vss. 19–21), and so it seems rather that he is seeking  the aid and protection of the gods round-the-clock, as it were.

The language of the hymn is fairly simple and straightforward, and the lexicon  often repetitive. But the effect is pleasing, and the poem hardly deserves Renou’s  judgment (EVP IV: 106) that it is “banal” and “facile.”
## 1
Agni has been set in front while the solemn speech (is being recited), as  have the pressing stones and the ritual grass while the ceremony (is
going forth).
With a verse I implore the Maruts, Brahmaṇaspati, and the gods for  help worthy to be chosen.
## 2
Here I have sung the (sacrificial) animal, the earth, the trees, Dawn and  Night, the plants.
And do you all, good ones affording all possessions, become furtherers  of our poetic insights.
## 3
Let our ceremony go forth first to Agni among the gods,
forth to the Ādityas, to Varuṇa of firm commandments, to the
all-radiant Maruts,
## 4
For they all, affording all possessions, caring for the stranger, will be  there for Manu, to increase him.
With invulnerable protectors, you who afford all possessions—hold out  to us shelter that keeps the wolf away.
## 5
Come to us here today, all of like mind and like delight—
o Maruts, goddess Aditi, great House-Goddess—at our verse and our  song to our seat.
## 6
Dear are those equine (gifts) of yours and dear to you the oblations to  which you drive, o Maruts and Mitra.
Let Indra, Varuṇa, the powerful men [=Maruts?], (and?) the Ādityas sit  on this ritual grass of ours.
## 7
We who have ritual grass twisted for you and pleasurable offerings set  out in due order,
who have soma pressed and the fire kindled, like Manu, invoke (you), o  Varuṇa.
## 8
Drive forth hither, o Maruts, Viṣṇu, Aśvins, Pūṣan, by reason of the  poetic insight belonging to me.
Let Indra drive here first, with those desirous of gain—he who is sung  as the Vr̥tra-smashing bull.
## 9
O gods without deceit, hold out to us unbroken shelter,
a defense that neither from afar, nor even from nearby will (anyone)
venture against, o good ones.
## 10
For there exists for you a common birth (with us), you gods who care  for the stranger; there exists friendship.
Commend us for previous good faring; right away (re)commend (us) for  newer favor. 11. Because just now (I have dispatched) a praise invocation to you, just  now for the distribution of desirable goods—
to you who afford all possessions have I, doing homage, dispatched (it)  like a lead(-cow).
## 12
O you of good guidance, for you has this Savitar, worthy to be chosen,  stood up, erect.
Down have settled the busy two-footed and four-footed, and those that  fly about.
## 13
Every god among you for help, every god for dominance,
every god for prizewinning would we invoke, singing with poetic insight  (as our) goddess.
## 14
For the gods, all as one, are of like fervor for Manu, of like generosity. Let them be for us now, let them be in the future for our progeny, the  finders of a wide realm.
## 15
I recite to you, o you without deceit, at the concourse of praise invocations. No injury (comes) to that mortal who has done honor to your
ordinances, o Varuṇa, Mitra, (and Aryaman).
## 16
He furthers his dwelling place, ex(tends) his great refreshments, who  does ritual service to your liking.
He is propagated through progeny forth from his foundation.
Unharmed and whole, he thrives.
## 17
That one acquires without fighting; along (paths) easy to go on he  travels his routes,
whom Mitra, Varuṇa, and Aryaman protect—they of like generosity  and like delight.
## 18
Even in the flat plain you make a niche for him; even in difficult going  (you make for him) smooth flowing.
Also this missile—it is now far from him—let it go unfaltering to
destruction.
## 19
Since today as the sun was rising you established truth, o you of dear  dominion,
since at (sun)set, at awakening, or since at midday of the day, you
affording all possessions,
## 20
Or since at evening, o lords, you held out shelter to the pious man who  pursues truth,
so might we stay nearby you, you good ones affording all possessions,  in your midst.
## 21
Since today when the sun rose, since at midday, since at the (time of)  covering [=evening?],
you establish a thing of value for Manu the discerning oblator, o you  affording all possessions,
1088 VIII.28–29
## 22
We would choose this much-protecting (shelter) of yours, o sovereign  kings, as a son would (his father’s shelter).
May we, pouring the oblation, reach that by which we shall reach a
better (state), o Ādityas.