+++
title = "028"

+++
28 (648)
All Gods
Manu Vaivasvata
5 verses: gāyatrī, except puraüṣṇih 4
A curious little fragment with no apparent unity, unlike the immediately following  hymn. The common canonical number of gods, thirty-three, is mentioned in verse  1, and these undifferentiated gods are apparently our global protectors in verse 3  and able to attain all their desires in verse 4. Verse 2 mentions an oddly assorted set  of gods: the three principal Ādityas, but also multiple Agnis, and two fairly mar
ginal groups of divinities, the Wives of the Gods and the Gift Escorts. Though verse  2 names the divinities, in contrast to verses 1 and 3–4, it shares the ritual context of  verse 1, which is lacking in the two following verses concerning the gods in general.
The final verse (5) is in the same riddling style as the following hymn (VIII.29),  though in a different meter, and its vocabulary invites the identification of the  “seven” as the Maruts (called thrice seven in I.133.6), especially since they are not  found in the following hymn.
## 1
The gods, three beyond thirty, who sat down on the ritual grass,
they found and once again they gained.
## 2
Varuṇa, Mitra, Aryaman, the Agnis with the Gift Escorts,
along with the Wives (of the Gods), are those to whom the
vaṣaṭ-cry is made.
## 3
These are our herdsmen to the west, these to the north, these likewise to  the south,
to the east—through their whole clan.
## 4
As the gods desire, just so will it be. No one will confound this (desire) of  theirs,
not even a hostile mortal.
## 5
Of the seven there are seven spears; seven brilliancies are theirs;
seven beauties did they put on.