+++
title = "031"

+++
31 (651)
Yajamāna + Patnı̄[Praise of Offering and Laud of  the Sacrificer 1–4; Household 5–9; Blessings for the Household  Pair 10–18]
Manu Vaivasvata
18 verses: gāyatrī 1–8, 10–13; anuṣṭubh 9, 14; paṅkti 15–18
This last hymn of the small Manu Vaivasvata collection shows its composite nature  by its length, its mixture of meters, and, especially, by its themes. The first nine  verses contain two parallel treatments of the same subject; verses 10–14 seem  unconnected both with what precedes and what follows, and resemble some of the  disordered All God sequences in earlier Manu Vaivasvata hymns (VIII.27.1–8 and  VIII.28) in calling on an odd assortment of gods for protection; the final four verses  (15–18) return to the topic of the beginning of the hymn, the benefits accruing to  the punctilious sacrificer, though in rather general terms.
The beginning of the hymn, especially verses 5–9, are of extraordinary rit ual interest, for they contain the only clear reference to the participation of the  Sacrificer’s Wife in R̥gvedic ritual—participation which is, in our view, a ritual  innovation in the late R̥gveda. (For indirect references to her presence in R̥gvedic  ritual, see Jamison 2011 and forthcoming a and b, and discussion ad VIII.33.) As  the Anukramaṇī states, verses 5–9 are dedicated to the “household pair” (dámpatī),  who are depicted as jointly participating in soma preparation (vs. 5). Their rewards  are great and appropriately domestic (see esp. vs. 8). Indeed, the mention of the  “milk-mixture” (āśír, vs. 5) makes it quite likely that the ritual depicted is the Third  Pressing, itself likely a ritual innovation, found only among certain R̥gvedic clans,  the pressing in which the participation of the Sacrificer’s Wife is particularly promi
nent in later śrauta ritual (see Jamison 1996a: 126–46). The first four verses of the  hymn mention only the Sacrificer, with no mention of the Wife, but a reference to  the milk-mixture in verse 2 and to the benefits to his house (vs. 4) makes it likely  that these four verses treat the same topic, though without the radical overt mention  of the Wife.

The Anukramaṇī considers the final four verses (15–18) to be blessings for the  same household pair (dampatyor āśiṣaḥ), but again there is no overt mention of the  Wife, and, in contrast to verses 1–4 with its reference to the milk-mixture, the ritual  that the successful sacrificer performed is left unclear.
## 1
Whoever will sacrifice for another and will also sacrifice for himself,  who will press (soma) and will cook (the oblation),
just that formulator will find pleasure of Indra.
## 2
Whoever will give the offering cake to him and the soma with its  milk-mixture,
able (Indra) will protect just him from difficult straits.
## 3
His chariot will be brilliant; god-sped, he will swell up,
winning all (the things) of the enemy.
## 4
In his house inexhaustible Refreshment, possessed of offspring
and milk-cows, gives milk day after day.
## 5
The household couple who with one mind press and rinse (the soma) with its own proper milk-mixture, o gods,
## 6
Those two go up against the puffed-up (rival pressers?); united they  attain to the ritual grass.
They do not fade out when prizes (are at stake).
## 7
Those two do not spurn the favor of the gods, nor seek to conceal it; they seek to win lofty fame.
## 8
Possessing sons, possessing children they attain a complete lifespan, both decorated with gold.
## 9
The two whose oblations are worth pursuing, divvying up goods, doing  honor, for the sake of immortality,
they slam together the hairy udder; they perform friendly service to
the gods.
## 10
We would choose the shelter of the mountains, of the rivers,
of Viṣṇu, who stays by.
## 11
Let Pūṣan come here, let Wealth, let Fortune, best establishing
well-being and whole(ness),
a broad road toward well-being.
## 12
(Let) Aramati [/Devotion] (come), (let) every unassailing one with the  mind of a god,
the faultless (gift?) of the Ādityas.
## 13
Just as Mitra, Aryaman, and Varuṇa are our protectors, (so) are the  paths of truth, which are easy to travel.
## 14
Agni, the foremost god of the good ones do I invoke for you all with  a hymn—
(I and you all) serving him, dear to many, like an ally who brings
success to the cultivated lands. 15. Quick is the chariot of the one with god on his side, or a champion in  battles of every sort.
– Just he who, as sacrificer, seeks to attain the mind of the gods will
surpass non-sacrificers.
## 16
You suffer no harm, o sacrificer, nor do you, o presser, nor you, o seeker  of the gods.
– Just he who, as sacrificer, seeks to attain the mind of the gods will
surpass non-sacrificers.
## 17
Because of his (ritual) work no one can catch up to him, nor send him  away, nor keep him away.
– Just he who, as sacrificer, seeks to attain the mind of the gods will
surpass non-sacrificers.
## 18
There will be (a mass) of good heroes here and also (a mass) of swift  horses.
– Just he who, as sacrificer, seeks to attain the mind of the gods will
surpass non-sacrificers.
Hymns 32–34 form a small collection, with all three hymns devoted to Indra, and  frequently mentioning the Kaṇvas internally (and attributed by the Anukramaṇī to  three different Kāṇva poets). See Oldenberg (1888: 215).