+++
title = "032"

+++
32 (652)
Indra
Medhātithi Kāṇva
30 verses: gāyatrī, arranged for the most part in trcas ̥
The hymn begins with a call to the Kaṇva poets to praise Indra’s great deeds, and  the next two verses (2–3) provide a quick catalogue of Indra’s victories over several  of his lesser known opponents. This theme, with some of the same names/epithets,  returns at the end of the hymn (esp. vss. 25–27). In between we find the usual twin  exhortations to Indra—to come to our soma sacrifice (rather than that of others;  see esp. vss. 21–22) and to give us wealth and aid. The reciprocal obligation of the  sacrificers and the recipient of sacrifice is nicely expressed in verse 16, where Indra’s  debt to (other) sacrificers has been discharged by his countergift.
There is nothing of particular note in this hymn, though it is nicely executed. It  also contains several hapaxes and words with apparently non-Indo-Aryan phonol ogy, especially toward the beginning, that give it a slightly exotic air.
The internal structure of the hymn is not entirely clear. We follow Oldenberg’s  analysis, whereby the hymn consists of tr̥cas plus a final verse (30) save for verses  19–20, which form an incomplete tr̥ca with perhaps a verse missing. However, the  tr̥cas thus identified show little internal unity.1094 VIII.32
## 01
O Kaṇvas, with a song proclaim (the deeds) of Indra of the  silvery drink
done in the exhilaration of soma,
## 02
Who smashed Sr̥binda (so he became) harmless, smashed Pipru the  Dāsa puffed up like a snake [/Ahīśuva]—
he the strong one letting flow the waters.
## 03
Undermine the topside of Arbuda, the height of the lofty one. You have done this manly deed, Indra.
## 04
To the famed one (bring) your (soma) boldly, like a torrent [?] from the  mountain.
I invoke him of good lips for help.
## 05
Having become exhilarated, you will split apart the enclosure of the  cow, of the horse
like a stronghold for your comrades in soma, o champion.
## 06
If you will take pleasure in my pressed (soma) or you will find delight in  my solemn speech,
from afar come near through your own power.
## 07
We praisers abide in you, o Indra with your longing for hymns. You drinker of the soma—quicken us.
## 08
And bring us food, granting it inexhaustible—
many are your goods, liberal one—
## 09
And make us possessed of cows, of gold, of horses.
Might we be clasped by refreshments.
## 10
We invoke him of stammering speech, of stout forearms,
for help;
(we invoke) him who creates success, for aid.
## 11
Who as “hundred-intentioned one” then carries them out in the  concourse as Vr̥tra-smasher,
while providing many goods for the singers,
## 12
He as “able one” will be able for us, he who has gifts and brings  them near—
Indra, with all his help.
## 13
He who is the great streambed of wealth, easy to cross, the partner of  the presser—sing to that Indra,
## 14
The guider, the very steadfast one who wins fame in battles,
lord over much by his strength.
## 15
No one can restrain his powers, his liberalities;
no one can say, “he does not give.”
## 16
There exists no debt to the formulators, nor to the puffed-up  pressers now: no soma has been drunk without a counter(gift).
## 17
Sing just to the admirable one, to the admirable one recite
solemn words;
perform sacred formulations just for the admirable one.
## 18
The admirable one will tear out hundreds, thousands (of goods)—he  the unobstructable prizewinner,
Indra, who is the strengthener of him who offers sacrifice.
## 19
Wander widely following your own power, following the invocations of  the communities.
Indra, drink of the pressings.
## 20
Drink of (the pressings) that have their own milk-cows, both (the  pressing) at the son of Tugra’s [=Bhujyu]
and this one right here, which is yours, Indra.
## 21
Pass over him who presses with rage, the one who has pressed
in violation.
This one here—drink this pressed gift.
## 22
Pass through the three distant realms; pass over the five peoples, keeping watch over the nourishing streams, o Indra.
## 23
Like the sun its ray, let loose your rein. Let my hymns guide
you here
like waters, converging, to the deep.
## 24
Adhvaryu! Pour out the soma for the belipped hero.
Bring of the pressing (for him) to drink.
## 25
Who split the bolt of the water and released the rivers
downward,
who fixed the cooked (milk) fast in the cows,
## 26
He who is equal to song smashed Vr̥tra, (smashed) the spider’s son  [/Aurṇavābha] and the one puffed up like a
snake [/Ahīśuva].
With snow [/an icicle?] he pierced Arbuda.
## 27
To the strong one who lays low, the invincible victor,
sing your god-given formulation—
## 28
Who in the exhilaration of the soma stalk
oversees all commandments among the gods—Indra.
## 29
Hither let these two feasting companions, the pair of fallow bays with  golden manes,
convey (you) to the pleasure set out (for you).
## 30
The fallow bays, praised by Priyamedha, will convey you near,
much praised one, for soma-drinking.
