+++
title = "033"

+++
33 (653) Indra
Medhyātithi Kāṇva
19 verses: br̥hatī arranged in trcas 1–15, g ̥ āyatrī 16–18, anuṣṭubh 19
For most of its length (through vs. 15), this is an unremarkable hymn to Indra,  with the usual invitations to him to attend our soma sacrifice along with praise of  his overwhelming strength and requests for his bounty. Indra’s “resolve” (-krátu) is  frequently mentioned (vss. 5, 6, 11, 13, 14).
The last four verses (16–19), in a different meter, are also entirely different in  tone and intent and have given rise to multiple interpretations—especially the final  taunt (19d): “You, a brahmin, have become a woman.” Our view of this tantalizingly  opaque sequence is that it concerns the introduction of the Sacrificer’s Wife into the  performance of solemn ritual, an introduction celebrated in the nearby hymn VIII.31  (see remarks there). But, unlike the situation in VIII.31, the poet of VIII.33 displays  a conservative opposition to this ritual innovation, an innovation that he nonethe
less ascribes to Indra’s leadership. In verse 16 the poet complains that an unnamed  ritualist no longer listens to the instructions of his fellow ritualists but only to Indra’s.  In verses 17 and 18 Indra speaks, and though he at first disparages women’s intellect  (vs. 17), he asserts that a sacrifice directed by a complementary pair (mithunā́, a word  often used explicitly of a sexual couple) is especially successful (with implicit contrast  to the older model without female participation)—while at the same time suggesting  that the husband should keep the upper hand (or upper chariot-pole: the common  metaphor of sacrifice as chariot is in play). The final verse is, in our view, spoken by  the jaundiced poet himself. In the first three pādas he mocks his ritually innovative  colleague by pretending to be a mother inculcating proper feminine behavior into  her little daughter. The language is both slangy and heavily diminutivized, and the  crucial noun in pāda c, the dual kaśaplakaú, is a hapax and unclear, though it may  well refer to female genitalia. He then announces his reasons for this mockery: the  innovative colleague, by favoring women’s ritual participation, risks being tainted by  the female presence and becoming a woman himself. (Such charges have frequently  been directed at men who favor women’s rights, at least since the time of John Stuart  Mill.) For more detailed discussion, see Jamison (forthcoming a and 2011).
It is not entirely clear why this curious sequence is found tacked onto an other wise ordinary Indra hymn. It occupies the position often taken by a dānastuti, and  of course dānastutis often display a linguistic register similar to what is found here,  slangy and colloquial vocabulary, syntactically informal direct speech, and sexual  innuendo. It has been suggested that it is a sort of anti-dānastuti, a “satire” in the  technical sense. This is an appealing explanation for its position in the hymn, but  with the proviso that, at least in our interpretation, the target of the satire is clearly  not the poet’s patron (stingy or not), but a fellow ritualist.
## 1
We who are provided with pressings, with the twisted ritual grass,  like waters at the outpourings of the strainer, take our seats around you,
Vr̥tra-smasher, as praisers.
## 2
The men provided with hymns cry out to you exclusively when (soma) is  pressed, o good one.
When will you come thirsting here to our house, to our pressed (soma),  Indra, like a buffalo following its own track?
## 3
With the Kaṇvas, bold one, you will boldly tear out a prize worth a  thousand.
We beg for a tawny-formed (prize) consisting of cattle—right away, o  unbounded bounteous one.
## 4
“Drink!”—sing (thus) to Indra, at the exhilaration of the stalk, o  Medhyātithi,
to the mace-wielder, who is linked with the two fallow bays, who, when  (soma) is pressed, is a golden chariot,
## 5
Who has a good left (horse) and a good right one, the strong one, who  is hymned as the one of good resolve,
who distributes thousands, who has a hundred bounties, Indra, who is  acknowledged as the stronghold-splitter,
## 6
Who is audacious, who is unobstructable, who is embedded within his  beard,
possessing extensive brilliance, rouser, much praised, in his resolve
strong like an ox.
## 7
Who recognizes him when he drinks when (the soma) is pressed? What  vigor has he assumed?
This is the one who splits strongholds with strength, the belipped one  getting exhilarated from the stalk.
## 8
Like a wild elephant he has established his wandering [=his territory] in  many places, through his giving.
No one will restrain you; you will come here to the pressed (soma);
great, you wander about in your strength.
## 9
Though being strong, unprostratable, steadfast, perfected for battle, if the bounteous one will hear the call of a praiser, Indra will not stay  away. He will come here.
## 10
This is truly so: you alone are the bull for us, with the speed of a bull,  unobstructable—
for as a bull, strong one, you are famed in the distance, as a bull famed  nearby.
## 11
Bullish are your reins, bullish your golden whip;
bullish is your chariot, bounteous one, bullish your two fallow bays; a  bull are you of a hundred resolves.
## 12
Let the bullish presser press for you; o bull, flying straight—bring  (prizes) here.

The bull has run to the bull in the waters. It [=soma] is for you, o
mounter of the fallow bays.
## 13
Drive here, most powerful Indra, to drink the somian honey;
as bounteous one, (drive) on your own to the landing site. He of
good resolve will listen to the songs, the sacred formulations, and the
hymns.
## 14
You who bestride the chariot—let the fallow bays, yoked to the chariot,  convey you hither,
even across what belongs to the stranger, across the pressings that
belong to others, you Vr̥tra-smasher of a hundred resolves.
## 15
Set our praise today nearest to yourself, you greatly great one;
let our pressings be most availing to you for exhilaration, you
heaven-ruling soma-drinker.
## 16
[Poet:] He finds no pleasure in the instruction of you or me, (but only in  that) of the other one [=Indra],
the hero who led us hither.
## 17
Indra said just this, “the mind of woman is not to be instructed,
and her will is fickle.
## 18
[Indra, cont’d:] “(Nonetheless,) it’s the twin span, the complementary  pair [/married couple], aroused to exuberance, that draws the chariot  [=sacrifice];
but even so the chariot-pole of the bull [=husband] is higher.”
## 19
[Poet:] “‘Keep your eyes to yourself: look below, not above. Bring your  two little feet closer together:
don’t let them see your two little “lips” [?].’ For you, a brahmin, have  turned into a woman!”