+++
title = "035"

+++
35 (655)
Aśvins
Śyāvāśva Ātreya
24 verses: pariṣṭājjyotis, except paṅkti 22, 24 and mahābr̥hatī 24, arranged in trcas. ̥
The Anukramaṇī’s attribution of this hymn to Śyāvāśva is supported by his self-refer ence in verses 19–21 and his reference to his ancestor Atri in verse 19, but the virtuos ity so characteristic of Śyāvāśva’s Marut hymns in Maṇḍala V is not on display here.  This long hymn may be one of the most repetitive in the R̥gveda. In the first twenty one verses the c-pāda is identical, and the tr̥cas making up the hymn all have refrains  encompassing at least the second half-verse (pādas cd: vss. 1–3; pādas cde: vss. 22–24)  and usually the second (b)  pāda as well (bcd:  vss. 4–6, 7–9, 10–12, 13–15, 16–18,  19–21). This leaves the first (a) pāda as the only locus of variation in each tr̥ca, and  even that variation is patterned and under strict control. Moreover, the contents and  phraseology of the individual tr̥cas do not differ significantly one from another—urg ing the Aśvins to come to the sacrifice with numerous other gods and to partake of  our offerings while providing us with gifts and aid in return. The repetitive structure  has an incantatory effect, but it does not challenge the decoding skills of the audience.
The most interesting tr̥ca consists of verses 16–18. As a number of others have  pointed out, these three verses, asking the Aśvins to “quicken” or “animate” various  things for us, are appropriate to the three varṇas in turn: verse 16 to the brahmin, 17  to the kṣatriya, and 18 to the vaiśya. In fact, verse 16 begins with the word bráhma,  while 17 begins with kṣatrám. In 16 we ask for the Aśvins’ aid for ritual and priestly  elements, in 17 for elements related to kingly and martial power, and in 18 for our  livestock and people. As is well known, the varṇa system is not a prominent feature  of the R̥gveda and may well only be taking shape in this period, but this small collec tion of Śyāvāśva hymns displays it clearly—not only in this tr̥ca, but in the next two  twinned hymns (36 and 37) with their reference to bráhman and kṣatrá respectively.
## 1
With Agni, Indra, Varuṇa, and Viṣṇu, with the Ādityas, the Rudras, and  the Vasus,
in concert with Dawn and the Sun, drink the soma, o Aśvins.
## 2
With all insights and (all) creation, o prizewinners, in comradeship with  Heaven and Earth and the stones,
in concert with Dawn and the Sun, drink the soma, o Aśvins.
## 3
With all the gods, three times eleven, here in comradeship with the  Waters, the Maruts, and the Bhr̥gus,
in concert with Dawn and the Sun, drink the soma, o Aśvins.
## 4
Enjoy the sacrifice; take heed of my call. – Come down here to all our  pressings, o gods.
In concert with Dawn and the Sun, convey refreshment to us, o Aśvins. 5. Enjoy the praise song, like youths a maiden. – Come down here to all our  pressings, o gods.
In concert with Dawn and the Sun, convey refreshment to us, o Aśvins.

## 6
Enjoy the hymns; enjoy the rite. – Come down here to all our pressings,  o gods.
In concert with Dawn and the Sun, convey refreshment to us, o Aśvins.
## 7
Like hāridrava-birds (to the woods), you fly right to the wooden  (cups). – Like buffaloes (to water), you come down to the
pressed soma.
In concert with Dawn and the Sun, drive your circuit three times, o  Aśvins.
## 8
Like geese you fly, like travelers on the road. – Like buffaloes (to water),  you come down to the pressed soma.
In concert with Dawn and the Sun, drive your circuit three times, o  Aśvins.
## 9
Like falcons you fly to the distribution of oblations. – Like buffaloes (to  water), you come down to the pressed soma.
In concert with Dawn and the Sun, drive your circuit three times, o  Aśvins.
## 10
Drink and satisfy yourself and come here. – Provide progeny and  provide property.
In concert with Dawn and the Sun, provide nourishment for us, Aśvins. 11. Conquer and sing praise and offer help. – Provide progeny and provide  property.
In concert with Dawn and the Sun, provide nourishment for us, o  Aśvins.
## 12
Smite rivals and arrange allies in their place. – Provide progeny and  provide property.
In concert with Dawn and the Sun, provide nourishment for us, o  Aśvins.
## 13
Accompanied by Mitra and Varuṇa and accompanied by their statute,  accompanied by the Maruts you go to the singer’s call.
– In concert with Dawn and the Sun, drive with the Ādityas, o Aśvins. 14. Accompanied by the Aṅgirases and accompanied by Viṣṇu,  accompanied by the Maruts you go to the singer’s call.
– In concert with Dawn and the Sun, drive with the Ādityas, o Aśvins. 15. Accompanied by the R̥bhus, o bulls, accompanied by prizes,  accompanied by the Maruts you go to the singer’s call.
– In concert with Dawn and the Sun, drive with the Ādityas, o Aśvins.
## 16
Quicken our sacred formulation and quicken our insights. – Smite  demons; keep away diseases.
In concert with Dawn and the Sun, (drink) the soma of the presser,  o Aśvins. 17. Quicken our lordly power and quicken our men. – Smite demons; keep  away diseases.
In concert with Dawn and the Sun, (drink) the soma of the presser, o  Aśvins.
## 18
Quicken our cows and quicken our clans. – Smite demons; keep away  diseases.
In concert with Dawn and the Sun, (drink) the soma of the presser,
o Aśvins.
## 19
As if to Atri’s, listen to the first praise hymn of the presser Śyāvāśva, o  you roused to exuberance.
– In concert with Dawn and the Sun, o Aśvins, (drink) the (soma) aged  overnight.
## 20
Like gushes (of water), send gushing the good praise hymns of the  presser Śyāvāśva, o you roused to exuberance.
– In concert with Dawn and the Sun, o Aśvins, (drink) the (soma) aged  overnight.
## 21
Control the rites of the presser Śyāvāśva like reins, o you roused to  exuberance.
– In concert with Dawn and the Sun, o Aśvins, (drink) the (soma) aged  overnight.
## 22
Stop your chariot nearby. Drink the somian honey.
– Drive here, o Aśvins; come here. Seeking help, I call to you: provide  riches for the pious man.
## 23
When the speech of reverence is set forth and the rite set forth, o men,  in order to drink of the strengthening (soma),
drive here, o Aśvins; come here. Seeking help, I call to you: provide
riches for the pious man.
## 24
Satiate yourselves on the pressed plant prepared with the svāhā-call,  o gods.
– Drive here, o Aśvins; come here. Seeking help, I call to you: provide  riches for the pious man.