+++
title = "038"

+++
38 (658)
Indra and Agni
Śyāvāśva Ātreya
10 verses: gāyatrī, arranged in trcas ̥
This simple hymn is defined by its structure. Each of the three tr̥cas has a differ ent refrain, though each of the refrains begins with the vocative dual dvandva  índrāgnī “o Indra and Agni.” The final verse (10) breaks the pattern, though the  same dvandva is found, pāda-initial, in the genitive. In content the hymn is entirely  devoted to the soma sacrifice and the poet’s invitation to the two gods to come and  enjoy it. The poet names himself in verse 9 and summarizes his poetic activity in the  past tense. Such a summary is ordinarily found in the absolute final verse of hymns,  but here it is capped by the pattern-breaking verse 10.
As often in hymns dedicated jointly to these two gods, who share little in terms  of activities and attributes, they are either described in general terms or with epi thets related to one or the other—for example, in verse 1 it is technically only Agni  who is a “regular offerer of sacrifice” (r̥tvíj), while Indra is more appropriately the  victor in prize contests (vā́jeṣu) than Agni. The third term in that verse, kármasu “in acts/deeds,” is ambiguous, however, since kárman is regularly used both of the  types of heroic deeds associated with Indra and with ritual acts more commonly  ascribed to Agni. 1. Because you two are regular offerers of the sacrifice, winners in
prize-contests and in (cultic/heroic) acts,
– Indra and Agni, take note of this.
## 02
Streaming, driving on the same chariot, Vr̥tra-smashing, invincible— – Indra and Agni, take note of this.
## 03
Here is the exhilarating honey for you two—the men have milked it out  with stones.
– Indra and Agni, take note of this.
## 04
Enjoy this sacrifice to your liking, (enjoy) the pressed soma, you jointly  praised ones.
– Indra and Agni, come here, men.
## 05
Enjoy these pressings here, because of which you conveyed the
oblations.
– Indra and Agni, come here, men.
## 06
This “turn” of song enjoy, my lovely praise.
– Indra and Agni, come here, men.
## 07
Along with the early-traveling gods come here, you two of noble goods, – Indra and Agni, for soma-drinking.
## 08
Listen to (soma-)pressing Śyāvāśva, (as you did) to the call of
the Atris—
– Indra and Agni, for soma-drinking.
## 09
Thus did I call upon you two for help, just as the wise ones called— – Indra and Agni, for soma-drinking.
## 10
Here do I choose the help of Indra and Agni in company with
Sarasvatī,
the two for whom the song is recited.
The following group of hymns, VIII.39–42, is attributed to Nābhāka Kāṇva, who  names himself several times in VIII.40 and 41. The group is characterized by the  slangy refrain that puns on his name, nábhantām anyaké same “let  all the other  squirts burst!” The poet is also partial to the mahāpaṅkti meter, found in VIII.39–41.