+++
title = "039"

+++
39 (659)
Agni
Nābhāka Kāṇva
10 verses: mahāpaṅkti
Agni’s role as messenger between heaven and earth and as mediator between gods and  men is particularly emphasized in this hymn. And, in addition to his usual ritual role,  his identity as poet is also mentioned several times (see esp. vss. 1, 7, 9). The hymn

contains an example of the well-known trope of “pouring prayers” (vs. 3), and in the  middle of the hymn we find a pun on one of Agni’s standard epithets Jāta-vedas, in  verse 6 where it is said that he “knows” (veda) the “races” (jātā́) of gods and men.
The hymn in general has a benign tone and high discourse level, and so the flip pantly bloodthirsty refrain rests oddly in it. Only in verse 2 does it fit the contents,  and even there the linguistic register is quite distinct between the verse proper and  the refrain.
The poet handles the six-pāda structure of the mahāpaṅkti flexibly. The last pāda  of each verse is the Nabhāka refrain. Otherwise the first two pādas (ab) and the  fourth and fifth (de) pādas each group together, while the third pāda (c) belongs  sometimes with ab (generally in the first part of the hymn) and sometimes with de  (toward the end, vss. 7–9).
## 1
Agni have I praised, worthy of verses, Agni to be worshiped with
invocation. Let Agni anoint the gods for us,
for the sage poet acts as messenger between both (cosmic) divisions
[=heaven and earth].
– Let all the other squirts burst!
## 2
O Agni, (set) down on their [=gods’] bodies a laud with our newer  speech. (Put) down the hostilities of the hostile ones.
Let all the hostilities of the stranger, the hindrances keep away from here. – Let all the other squirts burst!
## 3
O Agni, prayers to you I pour like ghee into your mouth. Be the
discerning one among the gods,
for you are the foremost gracious messenger of Vivasvant.
– Let all the other squirts burst!
## 4
Every kind of vigor does Agni acquire, even as (soon as) he longs for  it—his oblation is the nourishment of the good ones—
he acquires luck and lifetime, acquires joy, for every invocation of the gods. – Let all the other squirts burst!
## 5
Agni shows brightly through his very mighty, bright (ritual) action. He is  Hotar of each and every (clan).
He is decked out with gift-cows, and he impels (them) to the (gift-)
reception.
– Let all the other squirts burst!
## 6
Agni knows the races of the gods, Agni (those) of mortals: (this is his)  secret name [=Jātavedas]. Agni is the giver of treasure.
Agni opens the doors, when well bepoured with a newer (speech).
– Let all the other squirts burst!
## 7
Agni is joined with goods among the gods, among the clans devoted to  sacrifice.
With delight he fosters the many poetic arts, as the earth (fosters)
everything—the god devoted to sacrifice among the gods.
– Let all the other squirts burst! 8. Agni, who, belonging to the seven human (divisions), is fixed amid all  the rivers—
to him have we come—the one with three dwellings, the best smasher of  Dasyus for Mandhātar, Agni foremost in the sacrifices.
– Let all the other squirts burst!
## 9
Agni inhabits the three (cosmic) divisions with their three parts, as sage poet. He will sacrifice to the thrice eleven (gods) here and please them for us,  as inspired poet and messenger, when he has been prepared.
–Let all the other squirts burst!
## 10
You, foremost Agni, among the Āyus, among the gods, alone have  control over goods for us.
Around you do the swirling waters circle, which are their own bridges. – Let all the other squirts burst!