+++
title = "041"

+++
41 (661)
Varuṇa
Nābhāka Kāṇva
10 verses: mahāpaṅkti
A mystical hymn dedicated to Varuṇa alone, celebrating the god as cosmogonic  creator and shaper of the world—both spatially, by measuring out the primordial  cosmic domains and holding down and apart the cosmic realms (esp. vss. 4, 10), and  temporally, by regulating the nights and days (vss. 3, 10). The sun and moon as his  deputies function at the intersection of the spatial and temporal (vs. 9). The god is  also presented as holding both human and natural phenomena within his encom
passing physical protection (vss. 1cd, 3ac, 4de, 7abc).
The hymn seems to have a loose omphalos structure. Verbal correspondences in  verses 2/9 (especially the “seven”) and 3/8 (ní √dhā “deposit” and feminine plurals)  provide a weak ring (see also the “three” in vss. 3/9 and “embrace” [pári √svaj] and  “envelop” [pári √mr̥ś] 3/7). And the two middle verses, 5–6, the omphalos proper,  point to the hymn’s cryptic message—the creative power of poetry and of the  knowledge and control of words, especially names.
Varuṇa’s later association with the waters is evident in several hints in the  hymn: his closeness to the rivers in 2d, who are also his seven sisters in 2e and the  seven over which he has control in 9e, and his identification as “a secret sea” in  8a. The waters may well be the referents of the unidentified feminine plurals in 7a  and 8c.
Much remains unclear in this hymn, however, and we do not claim to have pen etrated all its many mysteries. One of the most obvious, but perhaps least interest ing, puzzles is the relevance of the jaunty and bloodthirsty Nābhāka refrain to the  high-minded and solemn contents of the hymn.
## 01
Chant to this one for him to prevail—to Varuṇa, and to the Maruts, the  very wise ones—
(Varuṇa,) who guards the insights of the sons of Manu like the cows of  a herd.
– Let all the other squirts burst!
## 02
(Chant to) him in the same way with a hymn, with the composed  thoughts of our forefathers, and with the panegyrics of Nābhāka—
(him,) who is nearby at the rising of the rivers, having seven sisters he is  in the middle (of them).
– Let all the other squirts burst!
## 03
He holds the nights in his embrace; by his magic art he deposited the  ruddy (dawns). He (holds) everything in his embrace—the one lovely  to see.
Following his commandment, his trackers [=nights?] increased the
three dawns.
– Let all the other squirts burst!

## 04
Who is the one who fastened the peaks down upon the earth—the one  lovely to see—he was the measurer of the primordial place.
That is the leadership of Varuṇa, for he is like an energetic herdsman. – Let all the other squirts burst!
## 05
Who is the upholder of the worlds, who knows the secret names of the  ruddy (dawns), their hidden names,
he is a poet who fosters the many poetic arts, as heaven does its
(concrete) form [=sun].
– Let all the other squirts burst!
## 06
In whom are fixed all poetic arts—(he is) like the nave in a wheel. Do  honor to Trita [/the third one] with alacrity.
Like oxen in a pen to be yoked together, they have yoked the horses for  yoking.
– Let all the other squirts burst!
## 07
Who lies on these [fem. =the waters?] (like) a cloak, while enveloping all  the created things of these [masc. =the gods?] and their domains—
in Varuṇa’s household, in front (of him), are all the gods, following his  commandment.
– Let all the other squirts burst!
## 08
A secret sea, powerful, he mounts as if to heaven, when he has
deposited the ritual formula in them [=waters?].
He scattered the magic arts with his ray as his foot, as he mounted to  the celestial vault.
– Let all the other squirts burst!
## 09
Whose two bright, wide-gazing ones [=sun and moon] preside over the  three earths, and three times have filled the higher (seats)—
steadfast is the seat of Varuṇa. He has control over the seven (rivers?). – Let all the other squirts burst!
## 10
Who made the bright (days) and black (nights) becloaked following his  commandments, he measured out the primordial domain—
he who with his prop held apart the two world-halves, as Aja (Ekapad)  held up heaven.
– Let all the other squirts burst!