+++
title = "042"

+++
42 (662) Varuṇa (1–3), the Aśvins (4–6)
Arcanānas or Nābhāka Kāṇva
6 verses: triṣṭubh 1–3, anuṣṭubh 4–6
This last hymn of the Nābhāka series is actually two hymns, on the grounds both  of meter and of subject matter, as Oldenberg clearly states (1888: 213 n. 2). The  first three verses, in triṣṭubh, are dedicated to Varuṇa. They continue the solemn tone and the cosmic focus of the previous hymn to Varuṇa (VIII.41), but with none  of the complexities. The Aśvins are the target of the second three verses (4–6), in  a simple invitation to soma-drinking. The Nābhāka refrain is found only in this  second hymnlet.
## 1
He propped up heaven—the lord who possesses all possessions—he  measured out the expanse of the earth;
the sovereign king made all the living worlds his seat. All these are the  commandments of Varuṇa.
## 2
Extol lofty Varuṇa thus: offer reverence to the insightful herdsman of the  immortal.
He will extend to us shelter providing threefold defense. Protect us in  your lap, o Heaven and Earth.
## 3
Sharpen the will and skill of the man who puts his best into this
insightful thought, o god Varuṇa.
Might we board a boat that provides a good crossing, by which we might  cross beyond all difficulties.
## 4
The pressing stones, inspired poets, have roused you two, o Aśvins, with  their insightful thoughts,
for you to drink the soma, o Nāsatyas.
– Let all the other squirts burst!
## 5
Just as the inspired Atri kept calling to you two, Aśvins, with his hymns, for you to drink the soma, o Nāsatyas.
– Let all the other squirts burst!
## 6
In just this way have I called to you two for help, just as the wise have  called,
for you to drink the soma, o Nāsatyas.
– Let all the other squirts burst!
As Oldenberg remarks (1888: 216), on the basis of agreements in lexicon, phrase ology, and style it is likely that VIII.43–48 form a group, though they are not all  attributed to the same poet.