+++
title = "043"

+++
43 (663)
Agni
Virūpa Āṅgirasa
33 verses: gāyatrī, most likely arranged in trcas ̥
Though it is likely that this hymn is constructed of tr̥cas, there is little overt unity  within the tr̥cas. On the surface the hymn is a pleasant but generally unremarkable  praise of Agni. His ritual functions are showcased throughout, and toward the end  the “we” of the poet and his fellow sacrificers invoke him more and more insistently1114 VIII.43
in this role. But earlier in the hymn there is some nice naturalistic description of fire  and fires (vss. 3–10). In verses 14 and 16 the poet emphasizes the kinship between  himself and Agni as poet.
Another thematic strain evident in the hymn and asserting itself more and more  toward the end is the role of Agni as a unifying focus of various clans and settle ments in the larger Ārya community. In several early verses multiple fires are kin dled at once (vss. 4–5). In light of later parts of the hymn, these can be interpreted  as the separate family or clan fires, which are later joined conceptually in the single  fire to which all the separate groups give allegiance (see esp. vs. 18, also 27, 29). This  single fire, found in multiple places but shared by all the clans, is invoked for help  in combat in verse 21. Agni’s competitive (vss. 20, 25), martial (vss. 21, 23, 26, 32),  and ruling (vs. 24) aspects become more prominent in the second half of the hymn;  the sacrificers clearly wish to harness these powers for the good of the whole com munity. Though not insistent, this theme is pervasive and provides a subtle unity to  this superficially rambling thirty-three-verse composition.
## 01
For the inspired poet, the ritual adept, the indestructible sacrificer,  for Agni—
these hymns, these praises arise right here.
## 02
For you right here, yearning for it, o unbounded Jātavedas,
o Agni, I generate a lovely praise hymn.
## 03
Like brilliants, certainly, are your sharp scintillations, Agni.
With their teeth they snap at the woods.
## 04
The fallow bays with smoke as their beacon, sped by the wind up  toward heaven,
take up opposing positions—the fires.
## 05
These fires kindled here in opposing (places) have come to sight all  at once,
like the beacons of the dawns.
## 06
Black are the realms at the feet of Jātavedas on his advance,
when Agni grows on the earth.
## 07
Making the plants his wellspring (of nourishment), snapping (at them),  Agni does not become extinguished,
as he comes once again to the tender ones.
## 08
Bending back and forth with his tongues, flickering here and there with  his flame,
Agni shines brightly in the woods.
## 09
In the waters is your seat, Agni. You grow through the plants.
While (still) being in their womb, you are born again.
## 10
This flame of yours, Agni, when bepoured, blazes up from the ghee, kissing the offering spoons on the mouth. 11. To him whose food is oxen, whose food is barren cows, to the ritual  adept with soma on his back—
to Agni we would do honor with praises.
## 12
And you, o Hotar whose resolve is worthy to be chosen, with homage and with kindling sticks do we beseech, o Agni.
## 13
And you, o Agni blazing when bepoured, like Bhr̥gu, like Manu, like Aṅgiras, do we invoke.
## 14
For you—o Fire by fire, a poet by a poet, the real (thing) by a
real (man),
a comrade by a comrade—are kindled.
## 15
You—to the pious poet grant wealth in thousands,
o Agni, and refreshment abounding in heroes.
## 16
O Brother Agni, made by might, having ruddy horses, of blazing  commandment—
enjoy this praise of mine.
## 17
And you, Agni, have my praises reached—(the praises generated) for  the bellowing one who yearns for (them)—
like cows their cow-stall.
## 18
For you, best of the Aṅgirases, all these lovely settlements have separately yielded themselves to your desire, Agni.
## 19
With their insightful thoughts the inspired wise ones who are attentive  to poetic inspiration
have spurred Agni to join their meal.
## 20
You, Agni, prizewinner on the drives, do those who stretch out their  ceremony
reverently invoke as draft-horse (of the sacrifice), as Hotar.
## 21
Because you are of the same aspect in many places, preeminent
throughout all the clans,
in combats we call upon you.
## 22
Reverently invoke him, Agni who flashes forth when bepoured with  (streams of) ghee.
He will listen to this call of ours.
## 23
It is you we call upon, the listening Jātavedas,
who smash away hatreds, o Agni.
## 24
The infallible ruler of the clans, this overseer here of the (ritual)  statutes—
Agni do I reverently invoke: he will listen.
## 25
Agni pulsing with excitement all his life—like a young blood spurred on  to seek the prize,
like a (prize-seeking) team do we incite him.

## 26
Smashing away insults and hatreds, burning demonic forces
everywhere,
Agni, shine with your sharp (flame).
## 27
You whom the peoples kindle, as Manu did, o best of the Aṅgirases, Agni, take cognizance of my speech.
## 28
O might-made Agni, whether you are born in heaven or born in the  waters,
we call upon you with hymns.
## 29
To you do these peoples here, all the lovely settlements separately, impel the wellspring (of nourishment) to be eaten.
## 30
O Agni, may we be very attentive and with manly gaze,
crossing over difficult depths through all the days.
## 31
Agni, the gladdening one dear to many, sharp, pure-flamed,
do we implore with gladdening hearts.
## 32
You, Agni, with far-radiant goods, dispatching (darkness) like the sun  with its rays,
vaunting yourself, you keep smashing the dark shades.
## 33
This we implore of you, mighty one—that your giving does not
give out.
From you, Agni, (comes) the good thing worthy to be chosen.