+++
title = "044"

+++
44 (664)
Agni
Virūpa Āṅgirasa
30 verses: gāyatrī, arranged in trcas ̥
Like the last hymn, this one, though apparently divided into tr̥cas, shows little  unity within the tr̥cas. Indeed, this hymn does appear to ramble, unlike the last  one, in which several persistent themes provided structure. There are several sig nature words, especially forms of the root śuc “flame, blaze” and of the nominal  vásu “good/goods.” Agni’s ritual function is the dominant topic, and his twin and  contrasting roles as vípra “inspired poet” (vss. 10, 12, 21, 29) and kaví “sage poet”  (vss. 7, 12, 21, 26, 30) are regularly mentioned. But there is no clear development  in the hymn, and most of the verses contain standard descriptions and addresses  to the god.
## 01
With a kindling stick do friendly service to Agni; with (streams of) ghee  awaken the guest.
Into him pour oblations.
## 02
Agni, enjoy my praise. Grow strong through this thought.
Take delight in our hymns. 3. Agni I place in front as messenger; I appeal to him as the conveyor of  the oblation:
he will make the gods sit down here.
## 04
Your lofty beams rise upward as you are kindled,
upward the flaming ones, shining Agni.
## 05
Let my ghee-filled offering spoons come near to you, delightful one. Agni, enjoy our oblations.
## 06
Gladdening Hotar, seasonable offerer, of bright radiance, with
far-radiant goods,
Agni do I reverently invoke—he will listen—
## 07
The age-old Hotar to be reverently invoked, enjoyable Agni, who has a  poet’s purpose,
the full glory of the ceremonies.
## 08
O best of the Aṅgirases, enjoying these oblations here in due order, Agni, conduct the sacrifice at the proper season.
## 09
When you have been kindled, o comrade with flaming flame,
convey here
the divine race, as the attentive one.
## 10
The inspired poet, Hotar without deceit, whose beacon is smoke, with  far-radiant goods,
the beacon of the sacrifices do we implore:
## 11
“Agni, protect us. (Burn), god, against those who do harm.
Split hatred, o might-made one.”
## 12
Agni beautifying his own body with an age-old thought,
the sage poet is strengthened by the inspired poet.
## 13
I call the child of nourishment, pure-flamed Agni,
here to this sacrifice of good ceremony.
## 14
You who have the might of Mitra, o Agni, with your flaming flame sit here on our ritual grass along with the gods.
## 15
The mortal who serves god Agni in his own house,
just for that man will he bring goods to light.
## 16
Agni is the head, the peak of heaven; this (Agni) here is lord of the earth. He quickens the spawn of the waters.
## 17
Your flaming flames rise up as they flash, Agni,
your lights, your beams.
## 18
Because you hold sway over a choice gift, Agni, as lord of the sun, might I, your praiser, be in your shelter.
## 19
You, Agni, do those of inspired thought, you do they spur on with their  insights.
Let our hymns strengthen you.

## 20
Of the undeceivable, self-empowered messenger who is always
crackling—
of Agni would we choose the comradeship.
## 21
Agni, best possessor of flaming commandments, flaming inspired poet,  flaming sage poet,
flaming he shines when he is bepoured.
## 22
And let my visionary thoughts, let my hymns strengthen you at
all times.
Agni, take cognizance of our comradeship.
## 23
If I were you, Agni, or you were me,
your hopes would come true here.
## 24
Because you are surely the good lord of goods, Agni, with
far-radiant goods,
may we be in your benevolence.
## 25
Agni, like rivers to the sea, to you of steadfast commandments
do our hymns go bellowing.
## 26
The youthful clanlord, the sage poet, omnivorous, pulsing with much  excitement—
Agni do I beautify with my thoughts.
## 27
To the charioteer of the sacrifices, sharp-fanged, staunch,
would we make haste with praises—to Agni.
## 28
Let this singer here abide in you, comrade Agni.
To him be merciful, o pure one.
## 29
For you are a clever companion at table, always wakeful like an
inspired poet.
Agni, you will give light (all the way up) to heaven.
## 30
Agni, in the face of difficult passages, in the face of insults, o
sage poet,
lengthen our lifetime, o good one.