+++
title = "045"

+++
45 (665) Indra (except 1: Agni and Indra)
Triśoka Kāṇva
42 verses: gāyatrī, arranged in trcas ̥
The hymn begins and ends with a tr̥ca marked by a refrain (vss. 1–3 and 40–42). The  tr̥ca division can otherwise be faint, and in several instances seems to contravene  groupings of verse by content (see esp. vss. 36–39). The Anukramaṇī attributes the  hymn to a certain Triśoka, but this name has probably been plucked from verse 30.
The first two verses establish a ritual mise-en-scène, but we quickly move into the  martial and competitive mode that prevails in most of the rest of this long hymn. Familiar chords are struck: Indra is exhorted to destroy enemies in various fero cious ways (e.g., vs. 8) and to parcel out their goods to us (e.g., vs. 15), to drink our  soma and aid our efforts (e.g., vs. 14), and to give us rich gifts (e.g., vs. 12), and he  is praised for his past deeds (see esp. vss. 25–30).
But the hymn also has several unusual features. The poet expresses a remarkable  degree of apprehension about the exercise of Indra’s powers and fear that they may  be turned against him and his comrades. Although a certain amount of such senti ment (as in the beginning of vs. 10) is not rare in Indra hymns, the sequence of verses  31–35, which begins with a plea to Indra not to do what he has in mind and seeks  to accomplish, a sharp reversal of the usual request, depicts men in fear of being  Indra’s targets—or perhaps even just of witnessing his terrifying hyper-power (see  vss. 32, 35)—and begging for his mercy. Already in verse 19 they expressed worry  about their shaky relationship with Indra, and the poet speaks of their “offenses”  in verse 34, a term more at home in an Ādityan context.
Even more striking are two snatches of dialogue, which bookend the hymn: the  first two verses of the second tr̥ca (vss. 4–5) and the first two verses of the penul timate tr̥ca (vss. 37–38). In the first pair the just-born Indra takes up a bow and  asks his mother about potential enemies, and she replies with what appears to be a  proverbial expression assuring him of his ultimate victory. (This scene has a close  parallel in VIII.77.1–2.) In verses 37–38 it seems (the verses are quite obscure and  uncontextualized) that Indra and the Maruts exchange slangy insults: in 37 Indra  reproaches the Maruts (not named but identified by one of their epithets) for not  honoring their partnership by even thinking of abandoning him, while they reply in  38 by suggesting that he should have thought of that before, when he was hogging  the soma. The unspoken context is the well-known episode when all the gods but the  Maruts abandon Indra before the Vr̥tra battle (see, e.g., VIII.96.7, using some of  the same vocabulary), and the Maruts later demand from Indra a share in the soma  sacrifice because they stood by him (see especially the dialogue hymn I.165). This  intriguingly deracinated exchange seems to have been suggested to the poet by verse  36, in which he himself hopes not to be deprived of a comrade. If Indra himself  could find himself deserted by his friends, how much more conceivable such a situa tion is for a mere mortal. This theme of comradeship was announced in the refrain  to the first tr̥ca (vss. 1–3) and arises several times elsewhere in the hymn (vss. 16, 18).
Though the hymn does not have a clear structure—and its length would have  made such a structure difficult to apprehend in a performance situation—the  themes and concerns that keep surfacing give some sense of unity, and the two little  dialogues at the two ends of the hymn grab the attention.
## 1
Those who kindle the fire and strew the ritual grass in due order,
of whom Indra is the youthful comrade,
## 2
Lofty is their kindling wood, abundant their recitation, broad their  sacrificial post,
of whom Indra is the youthful comrade.

## 3
Unembattled himself, in battle the champion drives the troop along  with his warriors,
of whom Indra is the youthful comrade.
## 4
The Vr̥tra-smiter took the Bunda-bow; just born, he asked his mother: “Which ones are powerful; which ones are famed?”
## 5
She, the strong one [/Śavasī], replied to you: “Like a wasp at a mountain  he will fight,
who desires rivalry with you.”
## 6
And you, o bounteous one—listen: “Who wishes (something) of you,  for that you exert your will.
What you will make firm, that is firm.”
## 7
When the setter of contests drives to the contest in search of good  horses, Indra
is the best charioteer of charioteers.
## 8
Rip apart all attackers, mace-bearer, as if into (a million) pieces. Become the one who most receives our praises.
## 9
Let Indra set our chariot in front to win,
he whom injuries do not injure.
## 10
May we avoid your hatred (and be) fit for you to give to, able one. May we go to (prizes) consisting of cattle, Indra—
## 11
O possessor of the (pressing) stone, (the soma drops), though they  move deliberately, are bringing horses and hundreds of cattle,
are strengthening and faultless.
## 12
For day after day your upright liberal spirit
is ready to give thousands, hundreds to the singers.
## 13
For we know you as winner of spoils, Indra, bursting even into the  fastnesses,
like one breaking into a household.
## 14
Let the drops exhilarate you, as lead horse, o sage poet, audacious one, when we beg you for a niggard:
## 15
The impious rich man who has neglected to give to you bounteously, bring his possessions here to us.
## 16
These comrades here, possessing the soma, watch out for you, Indra, as those who have flourishing (cattle) watch out for their livestock. 17. And you, who are not deaf but have listening ears,
do we call here from afar for help.
## 18
When you should hear this call here, you should do (a deed) difficult to  forget, and then
you would become our most intimate friend. 19. For even though we’ve thought that we’ve been going a wayward course  to you,
still become for us a giver of cows, Indra.
## 20
As elderly men grasp a staff, we have grasped hold of you, lord of  strength.
We want you in our seat.
## 21
Sing a praise song to Indra, the warrior of much manliness,
whom none obstruct in battle.
## 22
When it has been pressed, I set you loose on the pressed (soma) to drink  it, o bull.
Become satiated; come through to exhilaration.
## 23
Let not the greedy dolts, let not the deriders deceive you.
Do not cherish those who hate the sacred formulation.
## 24
Here let the (soma drinks) with their profusion of cows [=milk]
exhilarate you to generosity.
Drink a lake, as a buffalo does.
## 25
Those (deeds) that the Vr̥tra-smiter set in motion afar, both the old ones  and the new,
proclaim these at the assemblies:
## 26
Indra drank the pressed (soma) of Kadrū for that which possesses a  thousand-arms [=battle?].
Then he displayed his own masculine power.
## 27
This is real: having obtained at Turvaśa’s and Yadu’s what is not to be  spurned [=soma],
he came through to victory by his labor.
## 28
I laud him to you as the surpassing one, as driller of the bovine prize  for the peoples,
and as one common (to all)—
## 29
As the master of the R̥bhus, not to be obstructed, as the strengthener of  the son of Tugra [=Bhujyu] (do I laud him) in solemn words
when the soma is pressed—Indra!
## 30
Who cut apart the broad, womblike mountain for Triśoka,
as a way for the cows to go forth.
## 31
What you take on, have in mind, and, becoming exhilarated, set out to  accomplish,
don’t do that, Indra. Have mercy!
## 32
For even a paltry deed of one such as you is famed on earth.
Let your mind go (to us?), Indra.
## 33
Just yours will be these glorifications and encomia,
when, Indra, you will be merciful to us.

## 34
Don’t smite us at a single offense, nor at two or three,
nor at many, o champion.
## 35
For I am afraid of one such as you—powerful, shattering,
wondrous, vanquishing with his attack.
## 36
Let me not find the lack of a comrade, nor of a son, o you of
outstanding goods.
Let your mind be turned here.
## 37
[Indra to Maruts:] “You young bucks—who, (as if) unpaired, has said,  as comrade to comrade,
‘I will leave (you)’? Who retreats from us?”
## 38
[Maruts to Indra:] “Hey bull. So—when (the soma) was pressed, being  insatiable you consumed a lot,
sashaying around the lower depths like a guy with ‘the dog-killer’ [=the  winning throw at dice].”
## 39
I hold onto these two fallow bays of yours, yoked by speech, along with  their chariot,
so that you will give to the formulators.
## 40
Split off all hatreds; parry oppressions. Smite the slighters.
The craved good thing—bring that here.
## 41
What is in a firm place, what in a solid place, Indra, what has been  borne away into a deep place—
the craved good thing—bring that here.
## 42
The abundance given by you that the whole people of Manu
will know—
the craved good thing—bring that here.