+++
title = "046"

+++
46 (666)
Indra (1–20), Dānastuti (21–24), Vāyu (25–28),  Dānastuti (29–33)
Vaśa Aśvya
33 verses: a variety of lyric meters combining 8- and 12- and 4-syllable pādas
This hymn has been called the most metrically varied hymn in the R̥gveda: it con tains verses of nearly twenty different meters, although all the verses that allow  analysis appear to be made up of the standard building blocks of eight-, twelve-,  and four-syllable pādas in various combinations. (Some irresolvable irregularities  remain.) For the most part, the verses are grouped into two-verse pairs (anomalous  pragāthas), but the hymn begins with a tr̥ca (vss. 1–3), and the metrically messy  verses 14–16 also appear to form a tr̥ca. The two dānastuti sections (vss. 21–24  and 29–33), broken by two pragāthas to Vāyu, show no internal metrical struc ture. The meter is discussed by Oldenberg with his characteristic acuity both in the  Prolegomena (1888: 109–10) and in the Noten. The hymn is miscellaneous in content as well. It begins and continues for some  time as a fairly standard Indra hymn, insistently focused on begging Indra for gifts  of all sorts. The Indra section continues through verse 20, but becomes more and  more problematic, with metrical and syntactic difficulties reinforcing each other.  Verses 14–16 are metrically almost unanalyzable, and they consist in great part of  syntactic fragments the relationships among which are difficult to construct. Verse  17 (paired in a pragātha with 18) equally resists metrical and exegetical certainty,  but introduces the Maruts as a counterweight to Indra; in verse 18 we return to  more rational metrical structure and, to some degree, analyzable syntax. The last  two verses of the Indra section (19–20) are fairly straightforward and bring the  praise of Indra to a conclusion with an explosion of adjectives (the first hemistich  of 20 is also made entirely of vocatives).
The remaining thirteen verses of the hymn consist of three almost equal parts: two  dānastutis (vss. 21–24, 29–33), interrupted by a dānastuti-tinged section addressed  to the wind god Vāyu, who participates in the Morning Pressing, when the priestly  gifts are distributed. Both dānastutis mention extravagant numbers of livestock. In  the first the poet Vaśa Aśvya mentions himself (vs. 21) and his patron Pr̥thuśravas  Kānita (vss. 21, 24); the final verse (24) of this first dānastuti has a distinctly sum
mary tone and clearly spells out the cause-and-effect relation between gifts and fame.  The second dānastuti mentions a more various set of patrons, and the poet names  himself in the final verse (33), as a “great maiden,” clearly his favorite gift, is brought  toward him. The diction and style of both dānastutis is straightforward; they lack  the sly puns and clever insult-as-praise and praise-as-insult that characterize many  dānastutis and seem intent only on counting up the spoils. The four intervening  verses (25–28) describes Vāyu’s dawn journey to the sacrifice, but it is made clear  that his purpose there is to give, or (vs. 27) to motivate the patron to give, to the poet.
## 01
To such a one as you, Indra, you leader with many goods,
do we belong, you mounter of the fallow bays.
## 02
For we know you, possessor of the stone, as real, as giver of
refreshments;
we know you as giver of riches—
## 03
You, of a hundred forms of help and a hundred resolves, whose
greatness
the bards hymn with hymns.
## 04
That mortal has good guidance whom the Maruts, whom Aryaman and Mitra protect—those without deceit.
## 05
Acquiring (wealth) in cows and horses and an abundance of heroes,  impelled by the Ādityas, he flares up
with much craved wealth always.
## 06
We beseech this Indra for a gift, him swelling with strength, fearless— we beseech the lord of wealth for wealth.1124 VIII.46
## 07
For in him exist all fearless forms of help altogether.
Let the spans convey him hither, who has many goods; let the fallow  bays convey him to the pressed (soma) for exhilaration.
## 08
Your exhilaration, which is worthy to be chosen, which is the most  Vr̥tra-smiting, o Indra,
which with superior men takes the sun, which is difficult to surpass in  battles—
## 09
Which, difficult to surpass, worthy of fame, is the overcomer in the  prize-contests, o you who grant all wishes—
you, o strongest good one—come here to our pressings. May we go to a  pen full of cows.
## 10
At our desire for cows, for horses, and for chariots, (now) just as before, create wide space for us, you greatly great one.
## 11
For I do not find a limit to your generosity in any way, o champion. Show favor to us, bounteous possessor of the stone, even now. You have  aided our poetic insights with your prizes.
## 12
The lofty one who makes his comrade famous, he, praised by many,  knows all the races.
Through the human lifespans they all call on him, on Indra the
powerful, with their offering ladles extended.
## 13
He will become our helper in the prize-contests—he of many goods, the  one who stands in front, the bounteous Vr̥tra-smiter.
## 14
Sing to the hero amid the raptures of the stalk; with a great hymn (sing)  to the discriminating one,
Indra by name, worthy of fame, capable like speech.
## 15
(You are by nature) one who gives a legacy to the body [=a son], who  gives goods, who gives a prizewinner in the prize-contests, o much  invoked one—
now then (do so)!
## 16
(Sing to him) who has control of all goods, who also, when he is  victorious, has control of this form (of his?),
(and has control) over those who yearn (for him). Now then!
## 17
We shall praise you great ones [=Maruts] for the rewarder fit for  nourishment, who comes fittingly, who comes regularly [=Indra]. Through the sacrifices and the hymns of all the peoples of Manu, you  [=Indra] are likely to attain (the favor) of the Maruts.
I sing to you reverently with a hymn.
## 18
Those who launch themselves in flight on their drives along the backs  of the mountains—
the sacrifice of those greatly noisy ones, the favor of those powerfully  noisy ones (you are likely to attain) while the ceremony is pro(ceeding). 19. O strongest Indra, bring here the shatterer of bad thoughts,
(namely) wealth to be harnessed for us, o you who stir thought—
preeminent (wealth), o you who stir thought.
## 20
O winner, good winner, powerful, brilliant, most brilliant, liberal-spirited, sovereign king, (bring wealth) victorious through victory,
victory-winning, enjoyable, foremost at the prize-contests.
## 21
Let him come here—any non-god who has taken as great a gift
as Vaśa Aśvya has taken from Pr̥thuśravas Kānita at the dawning of  this (dawn) here.
## 22
I have won sixty thousands in equine property, myriads, twenty
hundreds of camels,
ten hundreds of dusky mares, ten of those with three red spots, ten
thousands of cows.
## 23
Ten dusky (stallions), following wealth to fulfillment,
straight-tailed, swift,
skittish, have turned the felly homeward.
## 24
These are the gifts of Pr̥thuśravas Kānita, the very generous.
In giving a golden chariot, he has become the most bounteous patron. He has made his fame the highest.
## 25
Vāyu, drive here to us for the extension and the spread (of our line) to  be great and for bounty.
For we have performed (a sacrifice) for you, for you to give much, to  give greatly all at once.
## 26
As the one who drives here with his horses at the breaking of the day— with the thrice seven seventies—
(invigorated) with these soma drinks by the soma-pressers, (be ready) to  give, you soma-drinker, drinker of the clear purified (soma).
## 27
The one of good resolve who by his breath invigorated just this man  here, to give something brilliant to me
in the axle made of araṭu wood, in the presence of Nahuṣa, who is a  good performer (of rituals) for (a god) who performs even better,
## 28
You who are an independent king, in a wondrous form worthy of praise  and bathed in ghee, o Vāyu—
this drive (of yours), horse-impelled, dust-impelled, dog-impelled,
pro(ceeds). Here it is now!
## 29
Now then, I have won something dear to the vigorous one, sixty  thousand
(geldings, which are) just like stallions.
## 30
Like cattle to their herd, the geldings approach, the geldings
approach me.
## 31
Then when in a roving band [=caravan] a hundred camels roared, then (I took) twenty hundreds from the Śvitnas.

## 32
I, the inspired poet, took a hundred from Balbūtha Tarukṣa the Dāsa. These are your peoples here, Vāyu. With Indra as protector they
become exhilarated; with the gods as protectors they become
exhilarated.
## 33
And now this great maiden, facing Vaśa Aśvya,
with bright ornaments upon her, is led forth.