+++
title = "048"

+++
48 (668) Soma
Pragātha Kaṇva
15 verses: triṣṭubh, except jagatī 5
This well-known and frequently translated hymn is one of the very few dedicated to  Soma outside of the IXth Maṇḍala, and as such does not concern “self-purifying”  Soma (Soma Pavamāna), the subject of that maṇḍala. The preparation of soma  is not treated here, save for a single reference (vs. 7) to it as “pressed.” Instead the  emphasis is on soma’s effects, “when drunk” (pītá vss. 4, 5, 10, 12), on the drinker.  The immediate effect is euphoria; as in the famous exultant boast in verse 3 “we  have drunk the soma; we have become immortal; we have gone to the light; we have  found the gods.” The soma produces a sense of space and boundlessness (vss. 1, 2,  5) while, paradoxically, being confined in the drinker’s body (vss. 2, 9, 10) and hold ing this body together (vs. 5). The temporal equivalent of this spatial expansion is  the wish constantly expressed to “lengthen our lifetime” (vss. 4, 7, 10, 11). Soma is  thus characterized by vitality, or life force, which he also confers on the drinker: the  first and last verses of the hymn contain this signature word váyas.
The mood in the second half of the hymn darkens slightly. Though the poet still  sees Soma as his protector and kindly comrade, he senses the threats that cause  him to need that protection—threats from outside (vs. 8), from his own imperfect  actions (vs. 9), and even from soma itself (vs. 10). Though he ultimately pronounces  the threats vanquished (vs. 11), the mood of sheer exuberance has been broken.
The final few verses (12–14) take a more ritual turn, with our ceremonial dedica tion of an oblation to soma, in his connection with the forefathers (who themselves  receive soma, as is made clear elsewhere). The ancestor cult thus briefly surfaces  here, and the emphasis throughout the hymn on lengthening our lifetimes (on  earth) may provide a counterpoint to the ritually shaped afterlife inhabited by our  ancestors.
## 1
I of good wisdom have partaken of the vitality of the sweet drink, which  is rich in purpose and excellent at finding wide space,
which all the gods and mortals, calling it honey, converge upon.
## 2
When you have gone within, you will become Aditi [/boundlessness],  appeaser of divine wrath.
Drop, enjoying the comradeship of Indra, like an obedient mare
following the chariot-pole, you should follow riches to fulfillment. 3. We have drunk the soma; we have become immortal; we have gone to  the light; we have found the gods.
What can hostility do to us now, and what the malice of a mortal, o  immortal one?
## 4
Become weal for our heart when drunk, o drop, very kindly, like a  father to a son,
like a comrade to a comrade, you who are widely proclaimed as
insightful. Lengthen our lifetime, for us to live, Soma.
## 5
These glorious (drops), when drunk, seek wide space. As cows [=leather  straps] do a chariot, it [=soma] knots (me) together in my joints.
Let the drops guard me from my foot slipping, and let them keep me  away from lameness.
## 6
You have enflamed me like a churned fire. Make us conspicuous; make  us better off,
for now in the exhilaration of you, Soma, I think of myself as a rich  man. I shall advance to prosperity.
## 7
With a vigorous mind we would take a share of you when pressed, as of  ancestral wealth.
King Soma, lengthen our lifetimes, like the sun the dawning days.
## 8
King Soma, be merciful to us with well-being. We are under your  commandment: know this.
Potency and battle fervor are on the rise, o drop. Don’t hand us over (to  the battle fervor) of the stranger, at his wish.
## 9
For as protector of our body, Soma, you have settled down in every  limb, having your eyes on men.
If we will confound your commandments, be merciful to us, as our
good comrade, all the more, o god.
## 10
Might I be accompanied by a tender-hearted comrade, who would not  harm me when it has been drunk, o possessor of fallow bay horses.
This soma here that has been deposited in us—for it I go to Indra to  lengthen our lifetime.
## 11
These famines and diseases have gone off. Those allied to darkness have  shied away; they have become afraid.
Soma has mounted us to his full extent. We have gone to where they  lengthen lifetime.
## 12
O forefathers, the drop that, once drunk, entered into our hearts, the  immortal into the mortals,
to this Soma we would do ceremonial honor with an oblation. May we  be in his mercy and good grace.
## 13
You, Soma, coming to agreement with the forefathers, extend through  heaven and earth.
To you, drop, we would do ceremonial honor with an oblation. May we  be lords of riches.

## 14
Protector Gods, speak on our behalf. Let sleep not master us, nor  mumbling.
May we, always dear to Soma, possessed of good heroes, announce the  ceremonial honor.
## 15
You, o Soma, confer vitality on us on all sides; you, as finder of the sun,  possessing the eye of men—enter us.
You, o drop, along with your help—protect us from behind and also  from in front.
Vālakhilya Hymns
The following eleven hymns (VIII.49–59) are known as the Vālakhilya hymns.  These are apocryphal or, in Geldner’s felicitous description, “half-apocryphal”  (halbapokryph). A  number of khilāni or apocrypha were transmitted in the  R̥gvedic tradition, but only these eleven (or, in some other reported recensions,  somewhat fewer) were inserted into and transmitted within the R̥gveda Saṃhitā
itself, as well as in the khilāni collections. Moreover, these eleven were trans mitted with accents and were treated in the Padapāṭha, the Anukramaṇī (save  for the tenth, VIII.58), and so forth, though they were not commented on by  Sāyaṇa in his R̥gvedic commentary. In our R̥gveda recension, the Śākalya, they  were inserted between the sixth and seventh anuvākas of VIII, though they are  reported to appear elsewhere in other recensions, not always in a single group.  The Grassmann numbers, 1018–1028, reflect the status of these hymns as addi tions to the original saṃhitā.
The text of these hymns is in general less well transmitted than the rest of  the R̥gveda, and the hymns themselves sometimes have the air of a school exer cise. Notable in this connection is the fact that the first eight hymns proceed in  pairs, each pair dedicated to the same divinity (except for a few verses in the  third pair, VIII.53–54) and containing the same number of verses in the same  meter (except for a few verses in the last pair, VIII.55–56). Moreover, the first  pair (VIII.49–50) and, to a much lesser extent, the second pair (VIII.51–52)  follow the same model, verse by verse, often using identical or near identical  vocabulary but varying grammar, or else employing transparent lexical sub
stitution but keeping the grammar the same, and one can imagine that the  two hymns represent separate realizations of a set pedagogical task. However,  whatever the reason for their coupling, the pairs afford us interesting insights  into the composition of R̥gvedic hymns. For this reason, as well as the fact  that puzzles in one hymn of the pair are sometimes illuminated by the parallel  passages in the other, we will comment on the first two sets of paired hymns  together.