+++
title = "049"

+++
49 (1018)
Indra
Praskaṇva Kāṇva
10 verses: br̥hatī alternating with satobr̥hatī, arranged in pragāthas. Parallel to 50.
This pair of hymns follows a standard trajectory: the poet exhorts himself to praise  Indra for his generosity and his power, and then invites Indra to partake of the  soma at his sacrifice, traveling with his fallow bays from wherever he might be. The  final pragātha asks Indra to provide the same help and largesse as he has on other  occasions at the sacrifices of other, named individuals.
The interest in these two hymns lies in the interplay between the quite strict  parallelism in parts of each verse and the freedom with which the poet treats the  variable portions. There is no space here for a full catalogue of the correspondences,  but a few telling patterns will be noted. First, despite the pervasive parallelism there  are no repeated pādas between the hymns. The initial verses of the two hymns (49.1,  50.1) are perhaps the most fully parallel, and in subsequent verses the beginnings  and ends of pādas and half lines are more likely to be parallel than the middles,  not surprisingly given the salience of these positions. Responsion can take a num ber of different forms. Frequently there is exact responsion, as in 49/50.6c udrī́va  vajrinn avatáḥ...“Like a well-spring full of water, o mace-bearer....” Single-word  repetitions will ordinarily take the same metrical position, as in the pāda-final  surā́dhasam of 49/50.1a. Derivationally different synonyms can correspond, as in  49.5c svadáyanti / 50.5c svádanti, both “they sweeten”; similarly, to stems belonging  to the same root but with different nuances, 49.10c ásanoḥ “you won” versus 50.10c  ásiṣāsaḥ “you sought to win.” Or an expanded phrase can take the place of a single  word, as in 49.8b vā́tā iva “like the winds” versus 50.8b ójo vā́tasya “the power  of the wind.” Synonyms or functionally identical words can respond, as in 49.5b  (d)hiyānó áśvo ná “being spurred on like a horse” and 50.5b iyānó átyo ná “being  sped like a steed,” where the morphology and word order are identical, but the lexi cal realization entirely different. Phonological correspondence is not neglected, as  in the adjectives in the parallel phrases 49.8a ajirā́so hárayaḥ “nimble fallow bays”  and 50.8a rathirā́so hárayaḥ “fallow bays fit for the chariot.” And of course there is  rough semantic parallelism throughout the two hymns, even when there is no lexi cal, morphological, syntactic, or phonological identity. It is also the case that one  of the pair can provide the answer to an obscurity in the other, as in 49.2a where  śatānīkeva “like (something) with a hundred facets” responds to 50.2a śatānīkā
hetáyaḥ “missiles with a hundred facets,” where the comparandum is explicit.
## 01
Chant forth to Indra, the very generous, in the way that is known— who as a bounteous one possessing many goods—by the thousands, as it  were—exerts himself for you singers.
## 02
Like (a missile) with a hundred facets he advances boldly. He smashes  obstacles for the pious man.

Like the juices [=streams] of a much-nourishing mountain his gifts  swell forth.
## 03
The pressed drops that are your exhilarating drinks, o Indra who longs  for songs,
fill you, o mace-bearer, like waters a pond, following the accustomed  way, for your generosity, o champion.
## 04
Faultless, (life-)extending, strengthening—the sweetest of
honey—drink it,
so that becoming exhilarated, you will by yourself boldly scatter forth  (goods) to us like specks (of dust).
## 05
Being spurred on like a horse by the pressers, (come) at a run to our praise, which the milk-cows and the gifts sweeten for you, autonomous Indra,  among the Kaṇvas.
## 06
With homage we reverently approach (you) like a powerful hero, the  distinguished one dispensing imperishable goods.
Like a wellspring full of water for the one who pours it out, the poetic  thoughts flow (for you), Indra, bearer of the mace.
## 07
Whether now (you are) either at (another’s) sacrifice or (elsewhere) on  the earth,
from there come here to our sacrifice with your swift (horses), you of  great thought, powerful with your powerful (ones).
## 08
Nimble are your fallow bays, which are swift and overpowering like  the winds,
with which you speed around the progeny of Manu, with which (you  speed around) the whole (world), (for it) to see the sun.
## 09
We beg for such great cattle-bringing benevolence of yours, Indra, as when you helped Medhyātithi, o bounteous one, as when (you
helped) Nīpātithi to spoils—
## 10
Just as at Kaṇva’s, at Trasadasyu’s, o bounteous one, as at Paktha  Daśavraja’s,
just as at Gośarya R̥jiśvan’s, Indra, you won (wealth) in cattle and gold.