+++
title = "050"

+++
50 (1019)
Indra
Puṣṭigu Kāṇva
10 verses: br̥hatī alternating with satobr̥hatī, arranged in pragāthas. Parallel to 49.
## 01
Chant forth to the famed, very generous, able one for his dominance, who grants to the presser and to the praiser desirable goods, by the  thousands as it were. 2. His missiles with a hundred facets are difficult to overcome, the great  projectiles of Indra.
Like a beneficial mountain he swells among the bounteous ones when  the pressed (soma drinks) have exhilarated him.
## 03
When the pressed drops have exhilarated the dear one,
like waters my pressing has been deposited (in you), good one, (and it  will be) like milking cows for the pious.
## 04
Your [=poets’] thoughts of honey flow to the faultless (soma), which is  calling for help.
The drops, calling on you [=Indra], good one, have been set among the  praisers.
## 05
Being sped like a steed, he [=Indra] streams to our soma, good at the  ceremony,
which our greetings sweeten for you, self-giving one. At Paura’s you
take pleasure in the invocation.
## 06
(Chant) forth to the powerful hero, the discriminating one who gains  the stakes, the distinguished one of great generosity.
Like a wellspring full of water, mace-bearer, you always swell goods for  the pious man.
## 07
Whether now (you are) at a distance either on earth or in heaven, hitching up with your fallow bays, o Indra of great thought, come here,  lofty with your lofty (horses)—
## 08
Fit for the chariot are your fallow bays, which, unfailing, cross over the  power of the wind,
with which you made the Dasyu heed because of Manu, with which  you speed around the sun.
## 09
Might we know such help of yours anew, o champion,
as when you helped Etaśa when the stake was to be decided, as (you  helped) Vaśa at Daśavraja’s.
## 10
Just as at Kaṇva’s, o bounteous one, at the ritual offering, at the  ceremony, beside (Agni), the domestic leader of long counsel,
just as at Gośarya’s you sought winnings, you possessor of the stone, at  my side (win) a cowpen splendid with fallow bays.