+++
title = "051"

+++
51 (1020)
Indra
Śruṣṭigu Kāṇva
10 verses: br̥hatī alternating with satobr̥hatī, arranged in pragāthas. Parallel to 52.
By contrast to VIII.49–50, the parallelism of these two hymns is quite muted and  surfaces only occasionally. Not only are strict responsions rare, but the develop ment of the thought in each hymn is quite distinct, though both focus on Indra as1134 VIII.51
generous giver. The correspondence between the two hymns is clearest at the begin ning: both hymns have almost identical initial verses, save for the personal names  of the human hosts. These verses also have the same structure as the final verses  of VIII.49–50.10. There is also some verbal responsion in the beginning of verses  3 and 5, throughout much of verse 6, and at the beginning of verse 7, and there  are also correspondences that cross verse lines, for instance, 51.6c=52.4c táṃ tvā vayám...“we you...,” with the continuation of that pāda (51.6c) maghavann indra
girvaṇaḥ “o bounteous Indra who longs for songs” matched in 52.8a. As just noted, both hymns are primarily concerned to stimulate Indra to generos ity. In VIII.51 are interspersed several obscure references to unknown sagas: verse 2  with the old, prone Praskaṇva set upright (Praskaṇva figures also in nearby VIII.54.8,  but only as beneficiary of Indra’s largesse, and he is the poet to whom I.44–50 as well  as VIII.49, the first Vālakhilya hymn, are attributed) and Indra’s defeat of Krivi (vs.  8). And in verses 4 and 8, in identical language, an apparently miraculous birth follows  ritual and cosmogonic activity. One of these acts is the chanting of a “seven-headed,  threefold chant in the highest footstep” (vs. 4), and a stripped-down version of the  same phrase, “they chanted the chant” is found in the final verse (10), with the current  poets as subject, thus implicitly attributing cosmogonic powers to the poets of today. The construction of VIII.52 is far less orderly than that of 51. It is characterized  by subordinate clauses that lack main clauses (e.g., vss. 2, 3), lack of grammatical  agreement between apparently coreferential entities (e.g., sg. “whose” picked up  by “we” in vs. 4; similar disharmony in vs. 8), and a general looseness of structure  especially in the verses that lack all responsion to 51. If this was a school exercise,  perhaps it was an unsuccessful one.
## 1
Just as at Manu Sāṃvaraṇi’s you drank pressed soma, Indra,
and at Nīpātithi’s, at Medhyātithi’s, (do so) at Puṣṭigu’s, at Śruṣṭigu’s,  bounteous one.
## 2
Pārṣadvāṇa made old Praskaṇva, who was lying down, sit upright  together (with him, at a sacrificial session?).
The seer sought to win thousands of cattle; Dasyave Vr̥ka was aided  by you.
## 3
He who cannot get enough of hymns, who is the observant stimulator  of seers,
to this Indra speak with a newer thought, to give sustenance to him like  a man greedy for food.
## 4
He for whom they chanted the seven-headed, threefold chant in the  highest footstep,
that one made all these worlds cry out. Right after that his masculine  nature was born.
## 5
He who is the giver of goods to us, that Indra we invoke,
for we know his ever newer favor. Might we go to a pen full of cattle. 6. He to whom you exert yourself to give, o good one, that one achieves  the thriving of wealth.
We, who have pressed (the soma), invoke you, o bounteous Indra who  longs for songs.
## 7
Never are you a barren cow, nor, Indra, do you go dry for the
pious man.
Over and over, more and more, the gift coming from you, the god,
becomes engorged.
## 8
He who attained Krivi by his strength, while making Śuṣṇa heed with  his murderous weapons,
just when he propped up yonder heaven as he spread it out, right after  that the earth dweller was born.
## 9
You to whom every Ārya here belongs, every Dāsa, every
treasure-guarding stranger,
even across (all these) (come) to the Arya Ruśama Parīru. There there is  wealth anointed just for you.
## 10
The eager inspired poets have chanted a honeyed, ghee-dripping chant. Among us wealth spreads out and bullish power; among us are the
drops being pressed.