+++
title = "052"

+++
52 (1021) Indra
Āyu Kāṇva
10 verses: br̥hatī alternating with satobr̥hatī, arranged in pragāthas. Parallel to 51.
## 1
Just as at Manu Vivasvant’s you drank pressed soma, able one,
just as at Trita’s you will enjoy the poem, Indra, (even so) at Āyu’s you  bring yourself to exhilaration—
## 2
(Just as) at Pr̥ṣadhra’s, at Medhya’s, at Mātariśvan’s, Indra, you became  exhilarated on the (soma) being pressed,
just as at Daśasipra’s, at Daśoṇya’s, at Syūmaraśmi’s, at R̥jūnas’ (you  drank) the soma.
## 3
He who took as his own the hymns, who boldly drank the soma,
for whom Viṣṇu strode his three steps, according to the institutes of their  alliance ...
## 4
In whose praises, Indra, you will take pleasure when the prize (is set), you  prizewinner of a hundred resolves...
Eager for fame, we call to you, as milkers call on a cow who gives
good milk.

## 5
Who is a giver to us, he is our father—great, powerful, performing the  master’s part.
Even without our begging, let the powerful bounteous one who
possesses many goods give to us of cow and horse.
## 6
He to whom you are ready to give, o good one, that one spurs the  thriving of wealth.
Seeking goods, with praises we call on the lord of goods possessing a  hundred resolves: Indra.
## 7
Never do you stay away; you protect both breeds [=gods and men]. O fourth Āditya, the invocation destined for you, for Indra, has
mounted to the immortal (world?) in heaven.
## 8
For whatever pious one, o bounteous Indra who long for songs, you  muster your abilities, able one—
listen to our songs and lovely praise, o good one, to our call, like that of  the Kaṇvas.
## 9
The age-old thought has been expressed as praise. Speak the sacred  formulation to Indra.
Many lofty (songs) of truth have roared; the wise thoughts of the
praiser have been released.
## 10
Indra shook together lofty riches, together the two opponents [=Heaven  and Earth], together the sun.
Together the gleaming pure soma-drinks, together those mixed with
milk, have exhilarated Indra.