+++
title = "053"

+++
53 (1022)
Indra
Medhya Kāṇva
8 verses: br̥hatī alternating with satobr̥hatī, arranged in pragāthas.
A fairly conventional Indra hymn, which begins with a string of superlatives  applied to Indra and praise for his previous deeds (vss. 1–2) and then proceeds to  the invitation to the soma sacrifice (vss. 3–4). The poet asks Indra for the usual ben efits: wealth and aid, but he is especially concerned with winning in prize-contests  and battle raids. See especially verses 6–8.
## 01
You, the best of bounteous ones and most preeminent of bulls,
best stronghold-splitter, o bounteous Indra, finder of cows, lord of
wealth do we beseech for wealth.
## 02
You who set Āyu, Kutsa, Atithigva to shaking, while growing stronger  every day,
you do we invoke, seeking prizes—you of the fallow bay horses,
possessing a hundred resolves. 3. Let the stones pour out the honey’s juice of all of us—
the drops that have been pressed in the distance among (other) peoples,  and those that have been pressed nearby.
## 04
Smash all hatreds and bring them low. Let all (of us) win goods.
Even among the Śīṣṭas there are invigorating shoots for you, where you  become sated on soma.
## 05
Indra, come closer here with your help that provides secure wisdom— here, most wealful one with your most wealful superior powers, here,  friendly one with your friendly powers.
## 06
Make the lord of the settlements surpassing in the contest, governing all  domains, sharer in offspring.
With your powers lengthen (the lifetime of those) who, equipped with  solemn words, purify your resolve following the proper order,
## 07
(Your resolve) to help which best brings success. Might we be yours in  the bouts.
May we consider ourselves winners through our libations and
invocations to the gods.
## 08
For I, seeking the prize, enter the contest for the sacred formulation  always with your help, you of the fallow bays.
Seeking horses, seeking cows, I pledge myself just to you, at the
beginning of raids.