+++
title = "054"

+++
54 (1023) Indra (1–2, 5–8), All Gods (3–4)
Mātariśvan Kāṇva
8 verses: br̥hatī alternating with satobr̥hatī, arranged in pragāthas
Despite being technically twinned with VIII.53, this hymn has little in common  with its predecessor. However, verse 6 not only shares the concern for winning that  characterized the previous hymn, but also shares some of its phraseology: it begins  with a compound of ā́ji “contest” and two compounds with -pati “lord,” closely  paralleling VIII.53.6a, and much of the second half of the verse matches the second  half of VIII.53.7.
The three pragāthas dedicated to Indra (vss. 1–2, 5–6, 7–8) are interrupted by  one to the All Gods, an elementary listing of various groups of gods (vs. 3) and  individual gods and natural forces (vs. 4). The verses to Indra beg him to display  his generosity.
## 1
This heroic deed of yours, Indra, the bards sing with songs.
Beating time they furthered the nourishment dripping with ghee. The  Pauras approach with their visionary thoughts.

## 2
With their good (ritual) work they approach Indra for help—they at  whose pressings you reach exhilaration.
Just as you became exhilarated at Saṃvarta’s, at Kr̥śa’s, just so become  exhilarated among us.
## 3
All you gods joined in revelry, come here to us.
The Vasus, the Rudras will come here to help us. Let the Maruts hear  our call.
## 4
Let Pūṣan, Viṣṇu, Sarasvatī aid my calling, let the Seven Streams.
Let the Waters, the Wind, the Mountains, the Lord of the Forest, let  Earth hear my call.
## 5
What bounteous generosity is yours, most bounteous Indra,
with that become a feasting companion for our strengthening, become  Bhaga for giving, o Vr̥tra-smasher.
## 6
Because just you are lord of contests, lord of men, convey us to the prize,  o you of good resolve.
By their (ritual) pursuit, by their oblations and by their pursuits of the  gods, they have become far famed as winners.
## 7
For the hopes of the stranger come true: in Indra is the lifetime of the  peoples.
Approach us, to help, bounteous one. Milk out swelling refreshment.
## 8
Might we do honor to you, Indra, with praises. You are ours, you of a  hundred resolves.
Great, sturdy, enduring, unabashed generosity—make it spill down for  Praskaṇva.