+++
title = "055"

+++
55 (1024)
Dānastuti of Praskaṇva
Krś̥ a Kāṇva
5 verses: gāyatrī 1–2, 4, anuṣṭubh 3, 5
Although the Anukramaṇī identifies this hymn as a dānastuti of Praskaṇva by Kr̥śa  Kāṇva, as Geldner points out, it is more likely a dānastuti by Praskaṇva (mentioned  in the last verse of the previous hymn, VIII.54.8) to Dasyave Vr̥ka, mentioned in  the first verse of this one.
This little hymn begins almost like a parody of the great proclamations of great  deeds such as I.32: the poet briskly announces that he’s finished with his catalogue  of Indra’s heroic deeds and can now turn to the praise of his patron’s generosity.  The following two verses (2–3) list a miscellany of gifts, including some odd ones.  He then praises the Kaṇvas in general (vs. 4) and returns to the gift in the final verse (5). Its sevenfold nature (if that’s what the word means here: it’s disputed) is not  achieved until the end: the items listed in verses 2–3 add up to six groups, but with  the mares of 5ab we reach seven.
## 01
Since I have just abundantly surveyed the heroism of Indra, your
generosity
will now follow, Dasyave Vr̥ka.
## 02
A hundred gleaming white oxen shine like the stars in heaven;
with their might they seem to prop up heaven itself.
## 03
A hundred bamboo stalks, a hundred dogs, a hundred tanned hides, a hundred ewes with tufts like balbaja-grass, four hundred ruddy (cows)  (did you give me).
## 04
You have the gods well on your side, you descendants of Kaṇva. Passing  from strength to strength
like horses they keep pace.
## 05
From here on they will keep paying tribute to the sevenfold (gift). Great  is the praise of (the gift) that lacks nothing.
When the dusky (mares) dust over the paths, they are not to be
encompassed by the eye.