+++
title = "056"

+++
56 (1025)
Dānastuti of Praskaṇva (1–4), Agni and Sūrya (5)
Prṣ̥ adhra Kāṇva
5 verses: gāyatrī 1–4, paṅkti 5
Like the preceding hymn, this is more likely a dānastuti by Praskaṇva of his patron  Dasyave Vr̥ka (once again mentioned in vs. 1) than of Praskaṇva. The hymn follows  the general pattern of VIII.55: the generosity of the patron is praised in the first  verse, and the details of the gifts follow, especially in verses 3 and 4. The latter verse  describes the presentation of an adorned female whose identity is disputed, as the  readings of the R̥gveda and the khila collections differ. Some scholars consider her  to be Pūtakratu’s wife, thus the patron’s mother or stepmother, but the daughter of  Pūtakratu’s wife (following the R̥gveda reading with some minor adjustment), the  patron’s sister or half-sister, might make more sense. The final verse (5) to Agni and  Sūrya marks the moment of the kindling of the ritual fire at sunrise, when the ritual  gifts are distributed.
## 1
Your immoderate generosity has just been seen, Dasyave Vr̥ka—
Your capacious power is like heaven in its extent.
## 2
To me Dasyave Vr̥ka, son of Pūtakratu,
granted ten thousands from his own wealth.
## 3
A hundred donkeys for me, a hundred wooly ewes,
a hundred slaves, and garlands beyond that.
1140 VIII.57–58
## 4
Then there was also led forth the adorned (daughter) of Pūtakratu’s wife  [=Dasyave Vr̥ka’s sister]
just as if she belonged to a troop of horses.
## 5
Agni, the perceptive, has just been perceived, the oblation-conveyor  along with his chariot.
Agni shone with his blazing flame, having his own sun aloft, as the Sun  shone in heaven.