+++
title = "058"

+++
58 (1027)
“Fragment”
Not mentioned in the Anukramaṇī, so without rṣ̥ i attribution
3 verses: triṣṭubh
This fragment of three verses is not transmitted as a unity in the khila collections,  with verses 1–2 and 3 located separately. Verse 3 in fact appears to belong to the Aśvin hymn VIII.57, with which it fits well: the “left-over” soma it mentions is a  standard offering in the Third Pressing treated in VIII.57.
As for the other two verses, Geldner memorably characterizes verse 1 as a riddle  without an answer, and verse 2 as an answer without a preceding riddle. This seems  persuasive, and the two verses may have been secondarily connected because of the  bahudhā́ “in many forms, in many ways” that appears in the middle of the first pāda  of each verse. Proferes argues (2007: 56), again persuasively, that verse 1 inquires  about the compact or agreement between the Sacrificer and the priests that is ritu
ally dramatized in the later śrauta system in the ritual of the Tānūnaptra, in which  a formal alliance is created among these participants, and he suggests that this verse  is a precursor of that later ceremony. Verse 2, on the other hand, has been taken,  since Sāyaṇa, as the answer to the riddle posed in X.88.18ab “How many fires and  how many suns? How many dawns, and how many waters?” and the tone of this  verse is in harmony with the philosophical speculation characteristic of such Xth  Maṇḍala hymns.
## 1
This sacrifice here, which the priests, configuring it in many ways, carry  out with one mind,
and the Brahman who was yoked as reciter—what is the Sacrificer’s
compact there [=with them]?
## 2
Just one fire is kindled in many forms; just one sun has projected
through all.
Just one dawn radiates over this whole (world). In truth just One has  developed into this whole (world).
## 3
Your light-filled, three-wheeled, well-naved chariot, providing a beacon,  easy to sit in, bringing abundant valuables,
at whose yoking (Dawn) of bright bounties is born—that I call upon, for  you two to drink the “left-over” (soma).