+++
title = "059"

+++
59 (1028) Indra and Varuṇa
Suparṇa Kāṇva
7 verses: jagatī
This last Vālakhilya hymn presents a number of uncertainties in transmission, and  so it is difficult to know whether its sometimes awkward phrasing belonged to the  original poem or is the result of flawed transmission. In contrast, the hymn has a  rather tight structure, with an apparent omphalos: verses 3 and 5 have a number  of lexical correspondences, and in particular they both announce a truth (satyám).  These correspondences form a ring that defines verse 4, the central verse of the  hymn, as the omphalos, as well as containing the “truth” proclaimed in the adja
cent verses. All three verses refer to a group, or groups, of seven in riddling fashion.  At least the female “seven” in verses 3 and 4—seven voices, seven sisters—can be

identified as the soma-purifying waters, conceived of as the “seven rivers” of Vedic  mythology. (They are called “voices” because of the noise they make, just as one  of the words for “river,” nadī́, is derived from the root nad “roar,” an etymology  explicitly recognized by Vedic speakers.) The three heptads of verse 5 may refer to  the same streams, multiplied, or may evoke the number of gifts Indra and Varuṇa  should bestow in response.
The omphalos verse is left incomplete: the poet urges the two gods to “estab lish...” (dhattam [if this is the correct reading, as we think]) but does not specify the  object desired. This truncated wish returns at the end of the hymn, however. The  final verse contains two occurrences of this same verb, with a plethora of objects.  This completion of the unfinished expression of verse 4 may be seen as another  example of “poetic repair” (Jamison 2006).
Indra and Varuṇa do not form a natural pair, and it is not surprising that very  few hymns are dedicated to the two alone (I.17, IV.41–42, VI.68, VII.82–85, and a  tr̥ca in III.62 [1–3]). In the more prominent hymns to both divinities, especially the  justly celebrated IV.42, their contrastive qualities, especially their different types of  kingship, are highlighted. Here by contrast the two gods are essentially featureless  (the possible exception is 2cd), their only activities being to accept the soma offer
ing and give prosperity to the sacrificers in return. In fact, vocabulary appropriate  to a more standard pair of gods, the Aśvins, is adapted here, especially the vocative  “you two lords of beauty” (śubhas patī), a common epithet otherwise confined to  the Aśvins.
## 1
These portions here run to you two, Indra and Varuṇa; run forth to you  when the (soma-drinks) are pressed, for your great (generosity?).
At every sacrifice you bustle toward the pressings, when you do your best  for the sacrificer who presses (soma).
## 2
The plants and waters, offering tribute to these two, have reached  greatness, o Indra and Varuṇa—
the two who run on the far side of dusky space, at the far limit of their  road, the two of whom no non-god vaunts himself as their rival.
## 3
This is really true, Indra and Varuṇa: the seven “voices” of Kr̥śa milk out  a wave of honey for you two.
With these, you lords of beauty, help the pious man who, undeceivable,  keeps watch over you with his thoughts.
## 4
The ghee-sprinkling companions of soma, possessing lively drops, the  seven sisters in the seat of truth,
who are ghee-dripping for you two, Indra and Varuṇa—with these
establish....Do your best for the sacrificer.
## 5
We have proclaimed a true thing for great good fortune, have proclaimed  greatness and Indrian strength for the two vibrant ones.
Help us who drip ghee, o Indra and Varuṇa, with three groups of seven,  you lords of beauty. 6. O Indra and Varuṇa, in that you in the beginning gave to the seers  inspired thought, the thinking of speech, what is heard—
the insightful (seers) launched these as poems as they stretched out the  sacrifice. I looked upon them with fervor.
## 7
Indra and Varuṇa, establish undistracted benevolence and thriving of  wealth among the sacrificers.
Establish offspring, prosperity, and development among us. Lengthen  our lifetime for long life.
The grouping of the VIIIth Maṇḍala hymns that follow the Vālakhilya hymns (60– 103) is not as clear as in the earlier section of the maṇḍala, in great part because  the poets are far less likely to identify themselves. Nonetheless, the order of deities  and the number of verses per hymn provide good evidence. We follow Oldenberg’s  (1888: 216–18) proposed structure.
The next collection of hymns (VIII.60–66) is ascribed to Pragātha and several of  his sons. All but the first are dedicated to Indra.