+++
title = "060"

+++
60 (669)
Agni
Bharga Pragātha
20 verses: br̥hatī alternating with satobr̥hatī, arranged in pragāthas
The focus throughout most of this hymn is Agni in his sacrificial role, a theme strongly  established in the first five verses, and in his close relationship to the household and  clan. As a consequence of this latter relationship he also appears as the protector of  those entities against external threats: see verses 6–10, 12–14, and especially the two  final verses 19–20. The usual prayers for wealth and aid are not absent, however.
## 1
Agni, drive here with your fires: we would choose you as our Hotar. Let the oblation-bearing (ladle), held forth, anoint you, the best
sacrificer, for you to sit upon the ritual grass,
## 2
For the ladles are moving toward you at the ceremony, o son of strength,  o Aṅgiras.
We supplicate the child of nourishment, ghee-haired Agni, foremost at  the sacrifices.
## 3
O Agni, pure one, you are the sage poet and ritual expert, the Hotar who  receives (the command) “sacrifice!”—
delightful, the best sacrificer, to be invoked at the ceremonies by our  inspired poets with their thoughts, o blazing one.
## 4
Without deception, convey the eager gods here for them to pursue (the  offerings), o youngest one, untiring.1144 VIII.60
Come here to the well-placed pleasing offerings, o good one. Take  delight as you are spurred on [/set in place] by our insights.
## 5
Just you, of great extent, are the entruthed sage poet, o guardian Agni. Just you do the inspired poets and the ritual experts seek to attract here,  o you who shine while being kindled.
## 6
Blaze bright, brightest blazing one; shine joy for the clan. Give to the  praiser. You are great!
Let my patrons, overpowering their rivals and endowed with good fires,  be under the shelter of the gods.
## 7
Just as you incinerate the brushwood grown thick on the ground,  o Agni,
in the same way burn whoever stalks (us), lying to us and
ill-intentioned, o you who deploy the might of alliance.
## 8
Do not make us subject to a mortal who is a cheat possessed of  demonic power, nor to one who utters evil.
O youngest one, protect us with your protectors that are unfailing,  overwhelming, but kindly.
## 9
Protect us with one, Agni, and protect us with a second.
Protect us with three hymns, o lord of nourishments; protect us with  four, o good one.
## 10
Protect us from every hostile demon. Ever further us when prizes (are at  stake),
for we approach just you, the one nearest to the divine assemblage and  our friend, for strengthening.
## 11
(Bring) here to us praiseworthy wealth that strengthens vital force, o  pure Agni,
and give it to us, o apportioner—(wealth) much craved and very  glorious—with your good guidance—
## 12
(Wealth) with which we will vanquish in battles those who vaunt  themselves, as we overcome the aims of the stranger.
Strengthen us because of our pleasing offering, o you who have the  goods of skill. Quicken our insights so they find goods.
## 13
Like a bull sharpening his horns, shaking them again and again,  is Agni.
His sharp jaws are not to be withstood: well fanged is the young (son)  of strength.
## 14
For your fangs are not to be withstood when you spread yourself out, o  bullish Agni.
Make our oblation well poured, o Hotar. Win for us many things worth  choosing. 15. You lie in the pieces of wood and in your two mothers [=kindling  sticks]; the mortals kindle you.
Tireless, you convey the oblations of him who makes oblation. Right  after that you shine [/rule] among the gods.
## 16
The seven Hotars reverently invoke just you, o Agni, the unabashed one  displaying great abandon.
You split apart the rock with your heat and your flame. Agni, stand out  beyond the peoples.
## 17
Agni after Agni, not one poor, would we invoke for you [=the
assembled clans]—we with our ritual grass twisted,
with our pleasing offerings set in place—Agni here in each and every  (clan), the Hotar of the settled domains.
## 18
He [=singer?] keeps company with your intention in the shelter made of  good melody. O perceptive Agni, the *pieces of wood are for you.
By impulsion bring here to us the prize of many forms to be nearest to  us, for our aid.
## 19
O Agni, o singer and god, you are the clanlord who burns the demons, the houselord who doesn’t go abroad; you are great—the protector
from heaven, but devoted to the house.
## 20
Let demonic power not enter into us, nor the sorcery of those who  deploy sorcery, o you who have the goods of the glowing one
[=Pūṣan].
Keep thirst and hunger away, far beyond the pasture-lands; o Agni,
keep away those who deploy demonic power.