+++
title = "061"

+++
61 (670)
Indra
Bharga Pragātha
18 verses: br̥hatī alternating with satobr̥hatī, arranged in pragāthas
This hymn begins with the invitation to soma (vss. 1–3), but the poet soon turns his  attention to the gifts Indra will bestow, a theme that dominates the rest of the first  half of the hymn (through vs. 8). The sacrificial context returns at this point, and in  verses 11–12 the sacrificers seek to harness Indra as their comrade, whose powers they  wish to marshal for their protection against hostile forces (see esp. vss. 13, 15–18).
The syntax is fairly straightforward, but there are a number of rare words and  hapaxes (e.g., the last two words of vs. 9) and pleasing verbal plays. The poet espe cially likes variable repetition (of the type “unassailable assailant” vs. 3).
## 1
If Indra nearby will hear this twofold speech of ours,
the most powerful benefactor will come here to the soma-drinking by  reason of our fully focused insight.

## 2
For the two Holy Places [=Heaven and Earth] fashioned the bull as  sovereign king, for strength.
And as the first among the highest you take your seat, for your mind  has desire for soma.
## 3
Drench yourself in the pressed stalk, o Indra who bring many goods, for we know you, o master of the fallow bays, as victorious in battles,  as the unassailable assailant.
## 4
You whose reality cannot be confounded, o bounteous Indra, it will be  just as you wish according to your intention.
Might we win the prize with your help, o you of fair lips, as we go  quickly, o master of the stones.
## 5
Exert your ability, o master of ability, o Indra, through all your help, for we follow after you who are like Bhaga, glorious and finding goods,  o champion.
## 6
As multiplicity yourself, you are a multiplier of horseflesh, of cattle;  you are a golden wellspring, o god,
for no one will shun a gift in your (control). Whatever I beg for, bring  that here.
## 7
Come on and find fortune, to give goods to the attentive man. Boil up and over, generous one, for the seeking of cattle, up and over  for the seeking of horseflesh, Indra.
## 8
You are ready to give many thousands and hundreds of herds. We of inspired speech have brought the stronghold-splitter here, singing  Indra for his help.
## 9
If without inspiration or if inspired, someone has dedicated his speech  to you, Indra,
he will reach elation in devotion to you—o you of a hundred resolves,  whose battle-fury is upfront, whose (motto is) “I shall win!”
## 10
The strong-armed stronghold-splitter who causes destruction—if he  will hear my call,
we, seeking goods, will call upon the goods-lord of a hundred resolves,  upon Indra, with songs of praise.
## 11
Let us not be regarded as evil, or stingy, or greedy,
if just now we will make Indra, the bull, into our companion at the  pressing.
## 12
We have yoked the strong one, victorious in battles, the undeceivable  one who wants what he’s owed.
The winner, the best charioteer recognizes a prizewinning (racehorse),  even when it’s a blur—which is just the one he will attain. 13. Whatever we are afraid of, Indra, make us unafraid of that.
Bounteous one, exert your ability then through your help for us. Smash  away hatreds, away slights.
## 14
For you, lord of largesse, are (lord) of great largesse and of the dwelling  place of him who does honor.
We, who have pressed (the soma), invoke you, bounteous Indra, who  long for songs.
## 15
Indra, spy and Vr̥tra-smasher, protector from afar, is worth our choosing. He will guard the last one of us and the midmost. Let him protect us  from behind and from in front.
## 16
Protect us from behind, from beneath, from above, from in front, from  everywhere, Indra.
Put far away from us fear of the gods, far away the ungodly missiles.
## 17
Today after today, tomorrow after tomorrow, rescue us, o Indra—and  in the future.
Through all the days, by day and by night, you will guard our singers, o  lord of settlements.
## 18
Shattering champion, bounteous patron of powerful bounty, equipped  for heroic action—
o you of a hundred resolves, both your arms are bulls, which hold fast  to the mace.