+++
title = "063"

+++
63 (672)
Indra (except the Gods 12)
Pragātha Kāṇva
12 verses: gāyatrī, except anuṣṭubh 1, 4, 5, 7 and triṣṭubh 12, arranged in trcas. ̥
Compared to the simple diction of the last hymn, this one seems deliberately  stiff and full of labored expressions whose decoding slows the pace of the hymn,  perhaps on purpose. The hymn’s structure, by contrast, is rather simple and  follows a straightforward trajectory, with each of the four tr̥cas expressing a  different theme.
The hymn opens with a mysterious figure, the “tracker,” who is smeared or  anointed with mental constructs—intentions and insights—by two different  agents, who can be plausibly identified as the gods and Manu in his role as father  of mankind and the first sacrificer. This liminal figure, the tracker, is most likely  a ritual mediator between the divine and the human, and Agni makes the most  sense as the referent. The second verse confirms the ritual setting, and in the  third verse Indra makes his first appearance, in his role as opener of the Vala  cave. This mythological reference calls dawn to mind, and suggests the time of  the current sacrifice. Thus, the first tr̥ca establishes the scene as the Morning  Pressing.
The second tr̥ca (vss. 4–6) then calls Indra to that sacrifice; each verse contains  the word arká “chant.” In the third tr̥ca (vss. 7–10) various deeds of Indra are  celebrated, especially his defeat of enemies for the Five Peoples (vs. 7) and his  involvement, with Viṣṇu, in the killing of the Emuṣa boar (vs. 9), a myth which is  a specialty of this part of Maṇḍala VIII (VIII.69.14–15; 77.1–2, 6–8, 10–11; 96.2).  Here only the preliminaries, in which a rice porridge is fetched by Viṣṇu to nourish  Indra, are treated. The middle verse 8 mentions Indra’s manly deeds in general,  but also contains the phrase “you furthered the turning of the wheel” (cakrásya

vartaním), which reminds us of the later designation cakra-vartin “turner of the  wheel” for a universal monarch. The last tr̥ca (vss. 10–12) introduces the Maruts  and finally the gods in general as associates of Indra and calls on all of them  for help.
## 01
The tracker [=Agni?], stationed in front, has been smeared with the  intentions of the great ones [=gods],
he on whose doors father Manu smeared insightful thoughts to
the gods.
## 02
The stones with soma on their backs have sat up, as if to the measure of  heaven.
The solemn words and sacred formulations are now to be recited.
## 03
Indra, knowing how, uncovered the cows for the Aṅgirases.
That manly act of his is to be praised.
## 04
As of old, let Indra, strengthener of poets, fortifier of speech,
the kindly one, come among us for help at the pouring of our chant.
## 05
And therefore, following the intention of your will, those eager to  sacrifice (have cried out) “hail!”;
their chants have cried out to (you), who are swollen with strength,
Indra, to give of the cowpen.
## 06
All heroic deeds, both done and to be done, are in Indra,
whom the chants know as the very ceremony itself.
## 07
When cries were sent surging to Indra by the clan belonging to the Five  Peoples,
through the power of their inspiration, through the power of his
measure he laid the strangers low. He is peaceful dwelling.
## 08
Here is the praise that follows you: you did these manly deeds;
you furthered the turning of the wheel.
## 09
(Viṣṇu) strode widely to the rice porridge for this bull to live on.
(Indra) took it, as cattle do barley.
## 10
Seeking help as we present this (praise hymn), through you (all) might  we have skill as our father
for the strengthening of the one accompanied by the Maruts [=Indra]. 11. Yes indeed! through our chanters we cry out again and again for your  establishment according to the ritual sequence, o champion.
Let us conquer with you as our yokemate, Indra.
## 12
For us are the Rudras [=Maruts] in their profusion and the mountains  of one accord at the Vr̥tra-smashing, where the call is “Carry
(the day)!”
The steadfast one who has been established for the praiser and
presser—with him, Indra, as their chief let the gods help us.