+++
title = "064"

+++
64 (673)
Indra
Pragātha Kāṇva
12 verses: gāyatrī, arranged in trcas ̥
A hymn artful in its extreme simplicity. Its diction, its syntax, and its structure  are all straightforward. It consists of four tr̥cas. The first (vss. 1–3) begs Indra for  gifts and aid against enemies and celebrates his preeminence. The second (vss. 4–6)  calls him to the sacrifice. The third (vss. 7–9) consists of rhetorical questions about  Indra’s whereabouts and the possibility of his consorting with other sacrificers. The  final one (vss. 10–12) presents him with the just-pressed soma.
The transparency of the hymn is produced in great part by its syntax: many of  the verses contain several short, generally pāda-length sentences (vs. 1 is a typi cal example), and more extreme concision is encountered in the abrupt series of  imperatives “come! run! drink!” in the last tr̥ca (vss. 10c and 12c; cf. also 4a). Even  when the sentence extends beyond the pāda, it often deploys simple parallel con stituents across two pādas (e.g., vss. 3ab, 6ab). There is also no overt subordination  in the hymn (unless we count the nahí [“for not”] clause of 2c). There are almost no  past tenses (only in 5c [perfect] and 9a [aorist]); the finite verb forms are otherwise  limited to imperatives, indicative presents, and one presential perfect (8c).
The sentiments expressed and the vocabulary are likewise uncomplex and stan dard. Only the penultimate verse (11), with its apparent references to locales for  finding soma, causes any interpretive problems.
## 1
Let the praises whip you up. Show your generosity, o master of the stones. Strike down the haters of sacred formulations.
## 2
With your foot stamp down the ungenerous niggards. You are great, for no one is equal to you.
## 3
You are master of the pressed soma-drops, and you, Indra, of the  unpressed ones.
You are the king of the peoples.
## 4
Come here! Go forth—your dwelling is in heaven—as you take heed of  the separate communities.
You fill both worlds.
## 5
This very mountain, this peak, which holds a hundred, a
thousand (cows),
did you shatter apart for your praisers.
## 6
We by day at the pressing and we by night call upon you:
fulfill our desire!
## 7
Where is this young, strong-necked bull who cannot be bowed?
Who is the formulator who serves him?
## 8
To whose pressing does the bull, relishing it, descend?
Who finds their pleasure in Indra?

## 9
Whom have your gifts accompanied, whom have masses of brave men, o  Vr̥tra-smasher.
Who at the recitation is closest (to you)?
## 10
This soma here is being pressed for you amid the people of Manu,  among the Pūrus.
Of that—come! run!—drink!
## 11
Here is your dear (soma) in the reed-filled (pond?), here in the Suṣomā (River?)
the most invigorating in the foamy (lake?).
## 12
(Drink) this delightful one today for (you to show) great generosity, for  thrilling invigoration—
come to it, Indra! run! drink!