+++
title = "065"

+++
65 (674) Indra
Pragātha Kāṇva
12 verses: gāyatrī, arranged in trcas ̥
This hymn is at least superficially a twin to the last one: it is attributed to the same  poet, consists of the same number of verses, and is in the same meter. And indeed  it shows important similarities to VIII.64. It, too, tends to short, often pāda-length,  syntactic units and to balanced parallel constituents (e.g., 2a, c, 6ab), and there  are even agreements in wording:  the abrupt verse-final imperative “drink!” of  VIII.64.10 and 12 is repeated in 65.5 and 8 (with the former also containing éhi “come!” like the examples in VIII.64), and “we call upon” appears in the same verse  (6) in the same position in both hymns.
However, VIII.65 introduces some complications absent from VIII.64. Unlike 64,  which had no subordination at all, 65 begins with a subordinating conjunction (yád),  which occurs three times in the first two verses, and verse 2 finds its main clause only  in verse 3. (See also vs. 7.) Though present indicatives and imperatives predominate,  the range of verbal forms is somewhat widened as well, with injunctives (9b, 10c), aor
ists (8b, 12c), a subjunctive (2b), a preterital perfect (probably, 11c), and a number of  dative infinitives, as well as two of the much discussed -ṣé forms (5a).
The diction can be more resistant than that of VIII.64, as in verse 2 where the  choices given to Indra are puzzling. Are these places (as in the also puzzling 64.11)  or sources of exhilaration, and are there two choices or three? What do the opaque  phrases, especially “the sea of the stalk,” refer to?
Like VIII.64 this hymn consists of four tr̥cas. The last (vss. 10–12) is clearly  defined as a dānastuti. The other three are not thematically differentiated. They all  call on Indra to attend our sacrifice, and the major concern running throughout  is that rival sacrificers are competing with us for his presence (e.g., vss. 1, 2, 7, 9).  These first three tr̥cas, before the dānastuti, display ring composition: the command “drive here straightaway” (ā́ yāhi tū́yam) in 1c is echoed in 9b “come here straight away” (tū́yam ā́ gahi).
## 1
When, Indra, you are being called forward or back, upward or down  by men,
drive here straightaway with your swift (horses).
## 2
Whether you will bring yourself to exhilaration on the outpouring of  heaven in the presence of Svarṇara,
or on the sea of the stalk,
## 3
I call you here with songs, you great and broad, like a cow to give  sustenance,
and to drink of the soma, Indra.
## 4
Your greatness, Indra, your grandeur, god—let your fallow bays, bearing it, carry it here on your chariot.
## 5
Indra, you are to be hymned and praised: great, powerful, performing  the master’s part.
Come to our pressed soma! Drink!
## 6
We, who have pressed soma and have a pleasing offering, call you to take your seat here upon this our ritual grass.
## 7
Even though you are the support common to each and every one, Indra, we summon you to us.
## 8
Here is the somian honey for you—the men have milked it out with stones. Finding enjoyment, Indra, drink it!
## 9
Look beyond all the strangers who are also attentive to poetic
inspiration. Come here straightaway.
Place lofty fame in us.
## 10
The king is a giver to me—of dappled cows (with horns) wrapped in gold. Let the bounteous patron not suffer harm, o gods.
## 11
On top of the thousand dappled cows, I took glistening, lofty, wide, gleaming gold.
## 12
The descendants of Durgaha, very generous with a thousand for me, have made fame for themselves among the gods.