+++
title = "066"

+++
66 (675) Indra
Kali Prāgātha
15 verses: br̥hatī alternating with satobr̥hatī, arranged in pragāthas, except anuṣṭubh 15
This hymn of fifteen verses is longer than the Indra hymns that precede it (VIII.62– 65, all twelve verses long), and is therefore out of place in the collection. Oldenberg  suggests (Noten ad loc.) that it may consist of two hymns (or even three): verses 1–81154 VIII.66
and 9–14, with verse 15 appended in a different meter. However, as he also notes  (1888: 217), there is no strong internal support for this division, and it may very well  be a single hymn.
The invitation to Indra to the soma sacrifice is the primary theme of the hymn. It  begins with a call for Indra’s help (vs. 1) and continues with descriptions of the sac rificial offerings (vss. 5–8, 11–12), along with the usual hope that Indra will choose  our sacrifice over those of others (see esp. vs. 12). The poet remarks particularly on  the regular and predictable nature of the sacrifice (vs. 7), and in a striking image in  verse 8 suggests to Indra that, since even the apparently uncontrollable wolf follows  its own routine, Indra should make it a habit to attend our sacrifice as he has before.  The regular nature of the sacrifice has its drawbacks, of course: many others before  us and many others around us have performed and continue to perform it, but the  poet assures Indra in verse 11 that although he and his comrades are only the most  recent among the sacrificers, their formulations are novel and unprecedented (see  also vs. 5). The competition between us and the others is emphasized by the numer
ous occurrences of “many” in this hymn.
Interspersed are verses celebrating Indra’s power and his aid to his worshipers  (vss. 2–4, 9–10). Not all of this praise is entirely clear, especially that in 3ab, where  Indra is identified with two hapaxes, our translations of which are quite provisional.  In the final pragātha (vss. 13–14) the poet makes his strongest plea for Indra’s help.  The final verse (15), in a different meter as noted, is puzzling. It reassures an oth
erwise unknown group of people, the Kalis, that if they press soma, whatever is  threatening them will disappear.
## 1
With staying power and force (I call for) Indra, finder of goods, for help; as (we) sing loftily at the rite with its pressed soma, I call (for him) as if  for the takings of a decisive victor,
## 2
Whom neither obdurate nor substantial hindrances will obstruct when  the fair-lipped one is in the exhilaration of the stalk,
who, tearing them out for the laboring presser, is the giver of
praiseworthy (goods) to the singer.
## 3
The able one, who is a horse’s curry comb [?] or who is a golden stake [?], he sets the opening of the cattle-pen to shaking—Indra the
Vr̥tra-smasher.
## 4
He who casts upward for the pious man the goods assembled by many,  even when they are buried deep,
Indra, with mace, fair lips, and fallow bays, will act as he wishes
according to his will.
## 5
O champion praised by many, whatever belonging to men you held dear  even before,
we assemble that for you, Indra: the sacrifice, the solemn word, and the  surpassing speech, 6. As well as the soma drinks for your exhilaration, o mace-wielder  invoked by many, heaven-ruling soma-drinker.
For you become the best giver of desirable goods to the creator of
sacred formulations, to the presser.
## 7
At this time yesterday we made the mace-bearer drink here;
today, in the same way, bring the pressed soma to him. Now attend
upon the renowned one.
## 8
Even a wolf—wild and sheep-stealing—attends to its own patterns. Come here, having found pleasure in this praise song of ours with its  shimmering insight, Indra.
## 9
What manly deed of his now remains undone by Indra?
Indeed, by what fame has the Vr̥tra-smasher not been famed from
his birth?
## 10
Are there great powers that are unassailable by him? What has not been  laid low by the Vr̥tra-smasher?
Indra dominates all the Bekanāṭas who see the day and the Paṇis
through his will.
## 11
(Although we are) the latest of many, we present to you sacred
formulations without precedent, o Indra, Vr̥tra-smasher,
like a present, o mace-bearer invoked by many.
## 12
For although many are the hopes that call to you, powerfully ranging  Indra, and many are your forms of help,
pass over the pressings of the stranger, good one. Most mighty one,
heed my call.
## 13
We are yours; we inspired poets abide just in you, o Indra,
for there exists no other dispenser of mercy than you, o bounteous one  invoked by many.
## 14
You—rescue us from this neglect and hunger, from their curse.
You—because of our brilliant insight, do your best for us with your  help, most able one, as the way-finder.
## 15
Let just your soma be pressed. Kalis, stop fearing:
this miasma will go away; by itself it will go away.
The next group likely consists of 67–71, though Oldenberg (1888: 217) considers  the possibility that VIII.72 belongs here as well. Save for VIII.67 with its fanciful  authorial ascription, the rest (68–71) are attributed to Āṅgirasa poets.
