+++
title = "067"

+++
67 (676) Ādityas
Matsya Sāmmada or Mānya Maitrāvaruṇi or many fish caught in a net [bahavo matsyā jālanaddhāḥ]
21 verses: gāyatrī, arranged in trcas ̥
According to the Anukramaṇī, a fish (Matsya) or “many fish caught in a net” are  two of the three possible composers of this hymn. Unfortunately, there is not a  scrap of evidence in the hymn itself for these intriguing ascriptions. The poet begs  the Ādityas and their mother Aditi, who is more prominent in the hymn than in  most Āditya hymns (vss. 10–12, 14, 18), for shelter and protection from a range of  dangers and enemies and for continued life for ourselves and our progeny.
## 1
Now we shall beg these rulers, the Ādityas, for help—
the very merciful ones, (for us) to prevail.
## 2
Mitra will carry us beyond constraint, and Varuṇa and Aryaman, just as the Ādityas know how.
## 3
For their bright, praiseworthy shield exists for the pious man—
(the shield) of the Ādityas for the man who does it right.
## 4
Great is the help of you who are great, o Varuṇa, Mitra, and Aryaman. We choose your help.
## 5
Gird us, alive, against the deadly blow, o Ādityas.
Are you ones who heed the call?
## 6
Your shield, your shelter that exists for the man who has ritually  labored and who presses soma—
with that intercede for us.
## 7
O gods, does there exist wide (space emerging) from out of constraint?  Does there exist a treasure for the blameless man,
o Ādityas, you (whom others’) offenses cannot mislead?
## 8
Let this fetter here not bind us; let it avoid us for our great (good  fortune?),
for only Indra is famous for imposing his will.
## 9
Don’t (harm) us with the harm of crooked cheats.
O gods greedy to help, seize them!
## 10
And, great goddess Aditi, I entreat you,
the very merciful, (for us) to prevail.
## 11
Deliver us, whether we’re in the shallows or the deep, from someone  who wishes to smite us, o you who have powerful sons.
Let none of our offspring be injured.
## 12
Make faultless (shelter) for us, o widely spreading (goddess) possessing  a wide enclosure, (for us) to extend afar
and for our offspring to live. 13. They who, as heads of the settled peoples, untrickable, self-glorious, without deceit, guard their commandments—
## 14
Being such, free us from the mouth of wolves, o Ādityas,
like a thief who’s been bound, o Aditi.
## 15
Let this arrow go away from us, o Ādityas,
away malevolence, without striking us.
## 16
Because, o Ādityas of good gifts, over and over,
previously and now, we have benefited by your help—
## 17
Because, o attentive gods, each and every man, even one coming back  from an offense,
do you make to live—
## 18
This is the new (life) for an older (man) that will free us, o Ādityas, like a bound man from his bondage, o Aditi.
## 19
We do not have the driving force to leap beyond, Ādityas.
You—have mercy upon us!
## 20
O Ādityas, let the missile of Vivasvant, the finely made arrow,
not strike us now before old age.
## 21
O Ādityas, rip apart hostility, apart constraint, apart what is packed  together;
rip malady apart and asunder.