+++
title = "068"

+++
68 (677)
Indra (1–13), Dānastuti of R̥ksa and A ̣ ̄svamedha ́ (14–19)
Priyamedha Āṅgirasa
19 verses: gāyatrī, except anuṣṭubh 1, 4, 7, 10. Verses 1–12 arranged in trcas ̥
This hymn falls into two parts. It begins with four tr̥cas (vss. 1–12) dedicated to  Indra, each beginning with an anuṣṭubh verse and continuing in gāyatrī; there fol lows a single appended verse (13) continuing the thought of the previous verse. The  final six verses are a dānastuti to a set of patrons whose names and identities are  not entirely easy to sort out.
The Indra portion is conventional, with an emphasis on his extreme power and  might. The dānastuti is likewise comparatively straightforward compared to others  of this genre, with a catalogue of the gifts received and a promise to the patrons,  expressed in surprisingly negative terms, that even a man who wishes to insult them  will not be able to do so (vs. 19).
## 1
We will turn you here, like a chariot, for help and favor,
you powerfully ranging one who vanquish through your attack, o Indra,  strongest lord of the settlements.

## 2
O you of powerful outbursts, of powerful will, you able one whose  thought is everywhere,
you have filled (everywhere) with your greatness,
## 3
You the great, whose hands with their greatness have encompassed the earth-encircling mace of gold.
## 4
The lord of the unbowable strengths who has domain over all men do I call for you, together with his means and help for the separate  peoples and their chariots—
## 5
Him, ever-strengthening, whom men, every man for himself, call on in  (contests) whose prize is the sun,
for dominance and for help,
## 6
Indra, beyond measure and equal to song, strong, of good generosity, holding sway also over goods.
## 7
Him and him alone, Indra, do I impel to drink, for the sake of his great  generosity—
the dancer who holds sway over the communities, according to the  ancient praise that follows him.
## 8
You whose fellowship no (other) mortal has attained,
he will not attain your strengths, o you who swell with strength.
## 9
Aided by you, with you as our yokemate, might we win in our battles a great stake in the waters and the sun, o mace-bearer.
## 10
We implore you with our sacrifices, with our songs, o Indra most  longing for songs,
just as you helped Purumāyya in the prize-contests.
## 11
You whose fellowship is sweet, whose leadership is sweet, o master of  the stones—
yours is the sacrifice worth tussling over.
## 12
Make it wide for our own body and our lineage, wide for our dwelling. Extend it wide for us to live.
## 13
As a path wide for our men, wide for our cow, wide for our chariot— thus do we consider our pursuit of the gods.
## 14
Six men having sweet gifts approach me
two by two, in the excitement of soma.
## 15
From Indrota I received two silvery ones, from the son of R̥kṣa two  fallow bays,
and the two chestnuts of the son of Aśvamedha;
## 16
(Horses) having good chariots from the son of Atithigva, those having  good reins from the son of R̥kṣa,
and those having good ornaments from the son of Aśvamedha. 17. I gained six (horses), along with brides [?], from the son of Atithigva,  from Indrota,
along with Pūtakratu.
## 18
In the midst of these silvery ones there appeared a ruddy female  [=Dawn?] along with a bull,
having good reins and a whip.
## 19
Never will a mortal seeking to scorn you [=patrons], o you who are kin  to prizes,
hold disrepute over you.