+++
title = "069"

+++
69 (678)
Indra (1–10, 13–18), All Gods (11ab), Varuṇa
(11cd–12)
Priyamedha Āṅgirasa
18 verses: anuṣṭubh, except gāyatrī 4–6, paṅkti 11, 16, br̥hatī 17–18 [2 wrongly identi fied as uṣṇih by Anukramaṇī]
This often baffling hymn is metrically complex, as the above summary shows, and  its metrical patterns do not always coincide with its intricate structure. Although  many details remains obscure, the thematic outline of the hymn becomes clearer  when that structure has been discerned. In our view, the hymn falls into two halves  (vss. 1–9, 10–18), which are exactly parallel. Each consists of two tr̥cas (1–6, 10–15),  followed by a single verse celebrating the partnership between Indra and the poet  (7, 16), and ending with two verses concerning the Priyamedhas’ ritual offering to  Indra (8–9, 17–18). The parallelism is especially clear in the final three verses of  each half: both 7 and 16 contain the dual optative sacevahi “might we two become  comrades” and concern a journey of a certain number of steps. In both 8–9 and  17–18 the Priyamedhas are explicitly mentioned. They are exhorted to ritual per formance in verses 8–9, while in 17–18, as is suitable in hymn-final verses, their per
formance is summarized. The parallelism between the opening tr̥cas of both halves  is much freer, though there are rough correspondences.
The relationship between the two tr̥cas of the first half is noteworthy. The first  tr̥ca (vss. 1–3) is quite puzzling, with opaque phraseology and uncertain references;  the second tr̥ca (vss. 4–6) seems a double of the first, paraphrasing and explaining  it, in a sort of global example of “poetic repair” (Jamison 2006). The second tr̥ca  exhorts the poet to “chant forth” to Indra (vs. 4), and the next two verses describe  the preparation of soma for Indra, with the soma drops racing to the milk (con
ceptualized, as so often, as cows). With this in mind we can approach the first tr̥ca.  In verse 1 the opening phrase “forth, forth” recalls the similar phrase in verse 4  and allows the verb “chant” to be supplied (see also vs. 8). In verse 1 the recipient  of what is chanted, the poem, identified as “triṣṭubh refreshment,” is clearly Soma  (“the drop”), not Indra as in verse 4, but the constructions are parallel. The poem is

then the subject of the second half of the verse, as it seeks to win something unspec ified. In our opinion the subject of verse 2 is this same poem, taking aim at Soma  (the “roaring bull”) among the cows, who represent the milk-mixture. In verse 3 the
soma mixture is prepared for Indra, and, it seems, for the rest of the gods. This matched pair of triplets is followed by the remarkable verse 7, in which  the poet proposes a partnership between himself and Indra, a partnership to be  sealed by the symbolic seven steps that in the later marriage ceremony make a  marriage legal after the bride and groom have taken them, and that already in the  R̥gveda (X.8.4) are the symbolic act creating a contract or alliance. The phrase  “the seven(th) step of the comrade” seems to refer to this ceremonial institution.  In order to make this alliance the poet and Indra go to Indra’s own home and  drink the soma together, having made the journey over the surface of the sea  of soma (in our view, though others consider this to be a reference to the sun).  The relationship between poet and god is thus a surprisingly intimate one, remi niscent of that between the poet Vasiṣṭha and Varuṇa in VII.86–89, especially  the verses describing their former comradeship with grammatical constructions  and lexicon very similar to those here (VII.88.3–5). It is also similar to nearby  VIII.62.11, where the poet again proposes that he and Indra yoke themselves  together. The first half of the hymn is then brought to a close by the aforemen tioned exhortation to the Priyamedhas to chant to Indra (vs. 8), with a tantaliz ing glimpse of what appear to be three musical instruments accompanying them  (vs. 9).
The two tr̥cas opening the second half of the hymn (vss. 10–15) reverse the order  of obscurity. The first (vss. 10–12) is relatively straightforward and, at least to begin  with, matches material in the first half: the speckled cows giving milk for the soma  mixture in verse 10 remind us of the dappled cows and their milk in verse 3 (also  5–6), and Indra and other gods partake of the soma in verse 11, though the pres
ence and role of Varuṇa in verses 11–12 are somewhat puzzling. However, it is the  next tr̥ca (vss. 13–15) that almost defeats the interpreter, especially verse 13. There  is no agreement even on what god (or gods) the verse concerns, much less on what  the actions in question are and whether the verse is a self-contained syntactic unit.  We are inclined to take the verse as a suite of relative clauses referring to Indra,  who is triumphantly proclaimed in verse 14. The second half of verse 14 alludes  to the Emuṣa myth (also treated in VIII.77, etc.), in which, it seems, Indra as a boy  slew a boar named Emuṣa by shooting through a mountain, and brought (or Viṣṇu  brought him) a rice porridge and some buffalo (which had been protected by the  boar?) from the mountain. The next verse (15) most likely also concerns this myth,  or it may refer to another of Indra’s boyhood deeds. There are numerous difficulties  in these three verses, and our translation is only provisional.
The following verse (16) brings us back to the present, with the poet’s second  proposition of fellowship to Indra, again in the course of a journey. And the final  two verses (17–18) summarize the Priyamedhas’ ritual efforts and pronounces them  even better than before. We cannot claim to have settled the many issues of this hymn, but the structure  outlined above does give a context in which to evaluate the difficulties that remain.
## 01
Forth, (chant) forth your triṣṭubh refreshment to the drop that
invigorates heroes.
With your visionary thought and with plenitude it is seeking to win, in  order to gain wisdom.
## 02
You take aim at the roaring bull among your moist [=willing] females  and at the roaring bull among the females who keep hanging back,
at the lord of your prized milk-cows.
## 03
These dappled cows, which give the sweetening milk, prepare the soma  for him [=Indra].
At its birth the clans of the gods are in the three luminous realms of  heaven.
## 04
Chant forth with a song to the lord of cows, to Indra, in the way that  is known,
to the son of the real, the master of settlements.
## 05
The tawny (soma-drops) have been let loose at the ruddy (cows) upon  the ritual grass,
where we will bellow out together.
## 06
The cows have milked out the milk-mixture for Indra, the honey for the  mace-bearer,
since he found them in the remote place.
## 07
As we two, Indra and (I), go up to his home along the surface of the  coppery (soma),
having drunk of the honey three times, might we two become comrades  at the seven(th) step of the comrade.
## 08
Chant! Chant forth! Chant, o Priyamedhas!
Let your little sons chant, and you—chant boldly as if against a
fortress.
## 09
The Gargara(-instrument) will gurgle downward, the Godhā(-vīṇā) will  keep resounding all around,
and the Piṅgā(-string) will keep quivering all around. The sacred
formulation is offered up to Indra.
## 10
When the speckled (cows), who yield good milk and never kick, fly here, take hold of the kicking soma for Indra to drink.
## 11
Indra has drunk; Agni has drunk. All the gods have become
exhilarated.
Varuṇa will settle here, too. The waters have bellowed out to him, as  (cows) that share their young do to their calf.

## 12
You are well-provided with gods, Varuṇa—you through whose gullet  the seven rivers
stream, as through a tube that provides easy flow.
## 13
He who made the paired, well-yoked horses leap for the pious man, (who is) their swooping leader—and just this is the marvel—who was  set loose as the very measure (of heaven)—
## 14
Just he is solemnly proclaimed as the able one, as Indra, beyond all  hatreds.
The lad ripped (out) the rice porridge that was cooking far away on the  mountain.
## 15
Like a teeny-tiny wee little boy, he mounted his new chariot.
He cooked the wild buffalo of prodigious will for his father and
mother.
## 16
You fair-lipped houselord, mount your golden chariot.
Then we two might become comrades along the heavenly, ruddy (path)  with a thousand steps,
faultless and leading to well-being.
## 17
Bringing homage, they reverently approach him, their sovereign king,  just so.
Just this is his well-set goal when they turn him here to come and
to give.
## 18
Following the (custom) of their ancient house, the Priyamedhas
with twisted ritual grass, with their pleasing offering set in place, have  equaled their previous presentation.