+++
title = "070"

+++
70 (679)
Indra
Puruhanman Āṅgirasa
15 verses:  br̥hatī alternating with satobr̥hatī arranged in pragāthas 1–6; br̥hatī arranged in trcas 7–12; u ̥ ṣṇih 13, anuṣṭubh 14, puraüṣṇih 15
Another metrically complex hymn. The first six verses consist of three pragāthas in  br̥hatī alternating with satobr̥hatī, the next six (7–12) of two tr̥cas in br̥hatī, and the  last three (13–15) of verses in three different meters, but all consisting of eight syl lable or a mixture of eight and twelve syllable lines, like the br̥hatī/satobr̥hatī verses  before them.
The thematic divisions correspond well with these metrical divisions. The  first six verses are extravagant praise of Indra’s unequalled power. Having flat tered him with his praise, the poet occupies the tr̥ca portion with the usual  requests for Indra to exercise his generosity and, more strikingly, for him to pun ish mortals who do not worship him and do not follow the Ārya way, with the culminating verse 11 listing the numerous ways in which this evil man can deviate  from the proper path. One of the stylistic features especially of the tr̥ca section  (but see also vs. 4) is the tendency for the final word or words of the c and d  pādas to match (4cd, 7cd, 8cd, 11cd, 12cd; see also 9a+d), and there are other  verse-internal echoes.
The final three verses (13–15) are a dānastuti of Śara Śauradevya, or rather what  we might term an anti-dānastuti or, technically, a satire. The first of these verses (13)  poses a rhetorical question that seems to promise lavish praise to come, but the poet  takes this back in verse 14 with another rhetorical question: will you really receive  praise for a gift that consists of calves doled out in miserly fashion? The final verse  specifies just how miserly: a single calf for three poets. In these verses the standard  vocabulary of generosity (benefactor, patron, bounteous one) is deployed sarcasti
cally, and the poet cleverly gives his criticism a gloss of praise.
For an analysis of the phonetic and grammatical features of the entire hymn, see  Watkins (1995: 184–87).
## 1
He who is king of the separate peoples, a driver with chariots, rich, an overcomer in all battles, who is sung as the preeminent smasher of  Vr̥tra—
## 2
Beautify that Indra, o Puruhanman, for his help, him whose (mace) is  once again in (the hand of) the apportioner:
the mace, lovely to see, has been put back into his hand, like the great  sun into heaven.
## 3
No one will catch up with him who by his (ritual?) action created an ever  strengthening one
like Indra, welcomed with sacrifices by all, ingenious, unassailable but of  assailing might,
## 4
Invincible, mighty, and victorious in battles, in whose (control) are the  great, wide-expanding (waters?).
While he was being born, the milk-cows kept bellowing in unison; the  heavens and earths kept bellowing.
## 5
Since a hundred heavens and a hundred earths could be yours, Indra, a thousand suns were not equal to you when you were just born, o
mace-bearer, nor were the two world-halves.
## 6
You have filled all things with your bullish greatness, bull, and with your  strength, strongest one.
Help us to a pen full of cattle with your bright help, bounteous
mace-bearer.
## 7
A godless mortal shall not acquire refreshment, o long-lived one!
Indra, who will yoke his two steeds that win dappled cows, who will yoke  his two fallow bays—1164 VIII.71
## 8
(Call upon) him to give to you—Indra, the conqueror to be greatly  magnified,
who is to be called upon at the fords and in foreign parts, who is to be  called upon at the prize-contests.
## 9
Shape us up for your great generosity, o good one, champion—
(shape us) up for your great giving of bounty, bounteous one; (shape  us) up for great fame, Indra.
## 10
You are the one who seeks the truth for us, Indra. You find no
satisfaction in him who reviles you.
Gird yourself in between your thighs, o you of mighty manliness. Jab  down the Dāsa with your blows.
## 11
The man who follows other commandments, who is no son of Manu,  no sacrificer, no devotee of the gods—
him should your own comrade, the mountain [=mace?], send tumbling  down; the mountain (should send down) the Dasyu for easy smiting.
## 12
O strongest Indra, grab a handful of these (cows), o most capacious  one, to give to us,
like a handful of roasted grains, being disposed toward us. Grab two,  being disposed toward us.
## 13
O comrades, find the resolve: how shall we bring to success our
invocatory praise of Śara,
who is a benefactor, a patron without restraint?
## 14
Will you be praised in any way by many seers provided with ritual grass, Śara, if you will hand over your calves in just this way, one by one?
## 15
The bounteous son of Śūradeva, having grabbed hold of its ear, led a  calf here to us three,
a patron (leading) a nanny-goat to give suck (to three kids).