+++
title = "071"

+++
71 (680) Agni
Sudīti Āṅgirasa and/or Purumīḷha Āṅgirasa
15 verses: gāyatrī arranged in trcas 1–9; br ̥ hat ̥ ī alternating with satobr̥hatī arranged  in pragāthas 10–15
This, the last hymn of the small Āṅgirasa collection VIII.67–71, falls into two  parts, defined by meter: verse 1–9 in gāyatrī tr̥cas and 10–15 in br̥hatī/satobr̥hatī pragāthas. As Oldenberg suggested (1888: 217; Noten ad loc.), it could be made up  of two separate hymns, and the lack of thematic continuity in fact favors this divi sion, though there is some shared vocabulary. The first names of the two alternative  poets suggested by the Anukramaṇī were extracted from verse 14.
The first nine verses beg Agni’s protection for the pious worshiper from all  manner of malign and threatening forces, particularly those of other humans. It is Agni’s power as a god that is emphasized, with mortals hostile or devout subject to  this superior divine power, to be punished or rewarded, as they deserve. The second part of the hymn (vss. 10–15) is dominated by a stylistic pattern: Agni  in the accusative case is the goal of sacrificial actions and words throughout this  section. In verse 10 he is not named, but an epithet in the accusative is found in  every pāda of the verse. His name (agním) begins the next verse (11a), and in the  subsequent verses it is featured again and again. Verse 12 contains five occurrences  of agním, one beginning every pāda, plus one in the middle of the third. Verse 13  varies the pattern by beginning with a nominative form of the name, but the second  half-verse returns to the initial accusative, which continues through the subsequent  verses: three examples of initial agním in verse 14 (pādas a, c, d), two in the final verse  (15a, b). The interplay between our ritual devotion and prayers and his gifts and aid  is the topic of this section, but the content is far less noticeable than the form.
## 1
O Agni, protect us by your great powers from all hostility
and from mortal hatred.
## 2
For no human fury is master of you (gods), o (Agni), born dear. Just you are the protector of the earth.
## 3
O child of nourishment, of fortunate flame, along with all the gods give us wealth consisting of all desirable things.
## 4
Hostilities do not keep that mortal away from wealth, o Agni,
the pious one whom you safeguard.
## 5
Whom you impel toward the stakes at the winning of the
wisdom—o Agni, inspired poet—
he by your help will arrive at cows.
## 6
(Give) wealth consisting of many heroes to the pious mortal.
Lead us forth to a better state.
## 7
Deliver us: do not hand us over to one who wishes evil, o Jātavedas, to the mortal of evil intent.
## 8
Agni, let no non-god keep away the gift of you, a god.
You are the master of goods.
## 9
Mete out a measure of your great good, o child of nourishment, to us who are your singers, o comrade, o good one.
## 10
Let our songs go to him of sharp flame, lovely to see;
(let) our sacrifices (go) with reverence to him of many goods, lauded by  many, for his help—
## 11
To Agni, the son of strength, Jātavedas, for a gift of valuable things, (Agni,) who once again has come to be the immortal here among
mortals, the most delighting Hotar in the clan.
## 12
Agni (we beseech) on your behalf with sacrifice to the gods, Agni as the  ceremony proceeds,
Agni first in insights, Agni when a charger (is at stake), Agni to assure  success to the cultivated lands.

## 13
Let Agni in fellowship give us of his refreshments, he who is master of  valuable things.
Agni we beseech over and over when progeny and posterity (are at
stake), since he is the good one, the protector of our bodies.
## 14
Agni—with songs reverently invoke him of sharp flame for help;
Agni the famed (do) men (invoke) for wealth, o Purumīḷha; Agni as
shelter for Sudīti.
## 15
Agni we hymn to keep hatred away from us; Agni to give us luck and  lifetime.
In all the clans he will be the one to be invoked like a helper, the lighter  of the morning rays.
The next group consists of only three hymns, X.72–74 and has no real signature  features.