+++
title = "072"

+++
72 (681)
Agni or Praise of Oblations
Haryata Prāgātha
18 verses: gāyatrī
This hymn is so opaque that it is not even clear to whom, or what, it is dedicated.  The Anukramaṇī gives two choices: Agni or “praise of oblations” (haviṣāṃ stutiḥ).  There are several good reasons to prefer the second designation, or at least to reject  the first. On the one hand, Agni is named only once, close to the end (vs. 15) and  in conjunction with Indra. Though the ritual fire and its divine representative are  clearly the referents in a number of verses, a number of different ritual substances  and apparatus are also referred to through the hymn; the fire is not significantly  more prominent. Moreover, as Oldenberg points out (1888: 217), the third hymn  in this little collection is clearly to Agni, so that the first should have a different  dedicand.
As a number of scholars have noted, the hymn contains a sequence of ritual  moments, sometimes even quoting from mantras found in later ritual, depicted in  allusive and indirect fashion. Although some have tried to find a systematic and  sequential representation of the, or a, sacrifice, these efforts have not been suc
cessful. Rather we seem to have a set of discontinuous sacrificial vignettes, cast as  riddles. Though nowhere near as famous as the well-known riddle hymn (I.164),  this hymn resembles that one in certain ways, including a fondness for numerology  (vss. 7–9) and for unidentified referents (throughout).
We confess to being uncertain about many of the answers to these implicit rid dles, and for others the machinery of explanation would overwhelm the poetry.  We have therefore for the most part avoided parenthetical identifications and para phrases. In general the first verses (esp. 2–5) seem to concern Agni and the initiation of the sacrifice, signaled by the sighting of the horses and chariot (of the sun?) in  verse 6. Most of the rest of the hymn, verses 7–17, concerns the preparation of  soma. The final verse (18) has much the same structure as verse 6, which closed the  first section of the hymn, and has similar annunciatory function.
## 1
Make oblation! He will come here. The Adhvaryu seeks (him) again, knowing his command.
## 2
The Hotar sits down beside the sharp soma-plant, in Manu’s presence, taking pleasure in its companionship.
## 3
They seek him within (themselves) and among the people, (seek him) as  Rudra beyond inspired thought.
With his tongue they grasp the grain.
## 4
I have heated my familial bow. Imparting vital force, he has mounted  the wood.
With his tongue he has struck the millstone.
## 5
The gleaming calf, roaming here, does not find anyone to bind it. It pursues its mama to praise (her).
## 6
And it’s just now that his team of horses, great and lofty,
the binder of the chariot, has been sighted.
## 7
The seven (priests) milk the one (cow [=soma plant?]), and the two  (=hands?) send the five (fingers?) nearby,
at the ford of the river, at its sound.
## 8
With the ten (fingers) of Vivasvant, Indra has agitated the cask
of heaven with his triple hammer.
## 9
A newer firebrand goes around the ceremonial course three times. With honey the Hotars perform the anointing.
## 10
With reverence they dip out the encompassing wellspring with its  (water-)wheel above
and its sides facing downward, the inexhaustible one.
## 11
The pressing stones are just on their way to it. The honey has been  poured down into the lotus
at the wellspring’s surging forth.
## 12
O cows, approach the wellspring with help. Great is (the vessel?) of the  sacrifice, giving teeming abundance;
its two ears [=handles?] are golden.
## 13
Into the pressed soma pour glory [=milk], the full glory of the two  world-halves.
The Rasā (River [=water]) should receive the bull.
## 14
They [=soma juices] recognize their own home. Like calves coming  together with their mothers,
they pair off with their kin [=milk and water].
## 15
In the jaws of the (soma press) as it chews they make themselves a  support in heaven,
make their reverence to Indra and Agni, and create the sun.

## 16
The stranger has milked the swelling refreshment, the nourishment  associated with the seven steps,
along with the seven rays of the sun.
## 17
O Mitra and Varuṇa, at the rising of the sun I take of the soma:
it is healing for the afflicted.
## 18
And it’s just now that his place, the place of the delightful one, is to be  laid down:
he has stretched around heaven with his tongue.