+++
title = "074"

+++
74 (683)
Agni (1–12), Śrutarvan Ārksya’s Da ̣ ̄nastuti (13–15)
Gopavana Ātreya
15 verses: mixed anuṣṭubh and gāyatrī arranged in trcas, with the first verse of each ̥ trca anu ̥ ṣṭubh, the other two gāyatrī; final trca (13–15) all anu ̥ ṣṭubh
This hymn consists of five tr̥cas, each of which is thematically and syntactically uni fied. The first four (vss. 1–12) concentrate on the formal praise and invocation of  Agni, who appears in three of the four (vss. 1–6, 10–12) insistently as the accusative  object of the reverent approach of the worshipers. (The other tr̥ca, verses 7–9, has  the worshiper’s prayerful thought as its subject.)

Somewhat surprisingly, Agni is several times associated with a lexical and mythic  complex far more characteristic of Indra: obstacle [/Vr̥tra] smashing. Agni is called  the best smasher of obstacles in verse 4, and the theme returns in verses 9 and  12. This association may have been triggered here by the identification of Agni as  the tribal fire of the Anu (vs. 4), the group whose leader appears to be the poet’s  patron Śrutarvan (vss. 4, 13, 15). The tribal fire represents the (temporary) unifi
cation of separate groups of people generally mobilizing against outside threat,  and an obstacle-smashing tribal fire would serve their purposes well. Although the  unification theme is not insistent in the hymn, notice that the first verse begins by  announcing Agni’s affiliation with every clan, “dear to many” (vs. 1ab), and the joint  invocation of Agni by various peoples is repeatedly mentioned (vss. 2, 6, 10, 12).
The final tr̥ca (vss. 13–15), with slightly different metrical structure, is the poet’s  dānastuti of Śrutarvan and his gift of four horses and a chariot. Though it is not as  self-consciously clever as some dānastutis, verse 13 contains a nice pun.
## 1
The guest of every clan, dear to many, (shall we praise) on your behalf  as (we) seek the prize;
Agni belonging to the house shall I praise on your behalf, (with) speech  and with thoughts of fortifying song—
## 2
(Agni), whom the peoples laud with their lauds like Mitra [/an ally], offering oblations to him whose potion is melted butter—
## 3
To Jātavedas, much to be admired, who raised to heaven
the oblations lifted up among the conclave of the gods.
## 4
We have come to the best smasher of obstacles [/of Vr̥tra], preeminent  Agni [/the chief fire] belonging to the Anu,
before whose face lofty Śrutarvan, the son of R̥kṣa, flares up;
## 5
To immortal Jātavedas, lovely to see across the dark shades,
receiving the ghee-oblation, worthy to be invoked;
## 6
To Agni, whom these peoples here urgently invoke with oblations, pouring offerings with their ladles held forth.
## 7
This newer thought here has been produced from us for you, o Agni, o delighting, well-born, strong-willed guest, unerring and wondrous.
## 8
Let it be most wealful, most pleasing, and dear to you, Agni.
Well praised by it, grow strong.
## 9
Brilliance with its brilliance, it should set lofty fame upon fame
at the smashing of obstacles [/Vr̥tra].
## 10
(Him,) bestowing the chariot, the horse, and the cow, vibrant, a lord of  settlements like Indra,
whose claims to fame you [=priests] bring to triumph, and the one ever  to be admired (whom) the separate peoples (hymn).
## 11
You whom Gopavana will please with his hymn, o Agni, o Aṅgiras, o pure one, hear our call. 12. You whom the peoples urgently invoke to win the prize,
be attentive when it’s the time for overcoming obstacles.
## 13
Being summoned to Śrutarvan the son of R̥kṣa, who is roused to elation, I will swipe [=take] four head (of horses) as if swiping [=stroking/
grooming] flocks of tufted (sheep).
## 14
The four swift runners of most powerful (Śrutarvan),
along with a good chariot, will convey me to my pleasure, as birds
conveyed the son of Tugra.
## 15
This is really true—what I forcefully point out to you, o great river  Paruṣṇi:
o waters, there exists no mortal who is a greater giver of horses than  most powerful (Śrutarvan).
The next group of hymns, VIII.75–79, consists of one hymn to Agni (75), three to  Indra (76–78), and one to Soma (79), in appropriately descending number of verses.  The Indra hymns are all assigned to the same Kāṇva poet by the Anukramaṇī, but  the other two hymns have different authors, 75 an Āṅgirasa, 79 a Bhārgava.