+++
title = "075"

+++
75 (684)
Agni
Virūpa Āṅgirasa
16 verses: gāyatrī arranged in trcas ̥
Agni’s role in the sacrifice and his relationship with the poet-sacrificers is the subject  of the first two conventional tr̥cas (vss. 1–6), but a martial, indeed a belligerent,  strain appears beginning with verse 7. The setting seems to be a contest for cattle  or a cattle raid, and the poet calls on Agni to use his aggressive powers to defeat  encroaching threats and assure victory and the winning of cattle and wealth (vss.  7–13). The hymn ends with general, and less combative, prayers for help for the  sacrificer (vss. 14–16).
## 01
Harness your horses that best summon the gods, o Agni, like a
charioteer.
Take your seat as the primordial Hotar.
## 02
And as one who knows better, invite the gods for us, o god.
Make our trust (in the sacrifice) into all things worth desiring,
## 03
Since you—o youngest one, o son of strength to whom offering is made— have become the one possessing the truth and worthy of the sacrifice.
## 04
This Agni here is the lord of the thousandfold prize and of the
hundredfold;
as sage poet he is the head of riches.

## 05
As craftsmen [/R̥bhus] bend the felly, bend here, closer to the sacrifice, with the shared invocations, o Aṅgiras [=Agni].
## 06
Now for him, for the heaven-bound bull, o Virūpa [=poet],
with your very own speech rouse your lovely praise hymn.
## 07
What Paṇi shall we lay low with his weapon, the weapon of Agni whose  eye is not fooled,
when cattle are at stake?
## 08
Let not the clans of the gods, like rosy bathers [=Dawns],
leave us behind like cows a scrawny (calf).
## 09
Let not the coercion of anyone of evil intention and
encompassing hatred
crash down on us, like a wave on a boat.
## 10
Homage to your power, Agni! The separate peoples hymn you, o god. With your attacks shake our foe to pieces.
## 11
Surely you will toil for wealth for us, for our quest for cattle, Agni? Make a wide (way) for us, you wide-maker.
## 12
Do not shun us in this (contest for) great stakes, any more than a  burden-bearer would (his burden).
Win wealth as your takings.
## 13
Let this misfortune here follow some other one than us, to frighten him,  o Agni.
Strengthen our power of attack.
## 14
(The man) who offers homage or is no stingy patron, whose ritual labor  he [=Agni] has enjoyed—
him alone does Agni help with strengthening.
## 15
From beyond the distant boundary, cross over to the ones below, where I am. Help them!
## 16
For we know of your help from of old, o Agni—help like that of a  father—
and so we beg your favor.