+++
title = "076"

+++
76 (685) Indra
Kurusuti Kāṇva
12 verses: gāyatrī arranged in trcas ̥
A simple hymn that never strays far from its twin themes: Indra accompanied  by the Maruts and Indra drinking soma. The Maruts are mentioned as Indra’s  companions in each of the first nine verses, and the invitation to soma occu pies the middle six verses (4–9), while the Vr̥tra myth, glancingly alluded to,  occupies much of the first tr̥ca. Only the last tr̥ca lacks mention of the Maruts. The first verse of the last tr̥ca (10) appears to present the soma-drinking as  accomplished, and Indra’s role as Dasyu-smiter is celebrated in the next (11).  The final verse of the hymn (12) is a meta-verse describing the production of  the hymn itself. The numerological expression “eight-footed, nine-cornered” is,  as Oldenberg suggests (Noten ad loc.), a reference to the gāyatrī tr̥cas in which  this hymn is composed, with eight-syllable lines arranged into three verses of  three pādas each.
Although the hymn is simple, it makes implicit reference to a complex ritual  development—that, in the course of the R̥gvedic period, the Midday Pressing, orig inally dedicated entirely to Indra, made room for the Maruts as joint recipients of  the soma with Indra. An important mythological treatment of this ritual innova tion is found in I.165 and related hymns. Here we see only the liturgical result, an  insistence on Indra Marutvant in a soma-drinking context.
## 1
This master of artifice here I now invoke, Indra, holding sway by  his might,
accompanied by the Maruts—as if to twist (him here).
## 2
This Indra here, with the Maruts as comrades, split apart the head  of Vr̥tra
with a hundred-jointed mace.
## 3
Having grown strong, with the Maruts as comrades, Indra propelled  Vr̥tra apart,
releasing the waters of the sea.
## 4
Here he is—the one by whom in truth this sun was won,
by Indra, accompanied by the Maruts—to drink the soma.
## 5
Accompanied by the Maruts, possessing the silvery drink, mighty,  conferring abundance—
Indra do we invoke with songs.
## 6
Indra, accompanied by the Maruts, we invoke with our age-old
thought,
to drink of this soma here.
## 7
O Indra, accompanied by the Maruts, giver of rewards, drink the soma,  you of a hundred resolves,
at this sacrifice here, much praised one.
## 8
Just for you, o Indra, accompanied by the Maruts, possessor of the  stone, are the pressed soma-drinks,
provided with hymns, poured out with our whole heart.
## 9
Just drink, o Indra, with the Maruts as comrades, the pressed soma at  the rituals of the day,
sharpening your mace with might.
## 10
Standing up with your might, you made your two lips shake after you  had drunk
the pressed soma in the cup, Indra.1174 VIII.77
## 11
Both the world-halves yearned after you as you howled,
Indra, when you became the smiter of the Dasyus.
## 12
An eight-footed nine-cornered speech that touches the truth—
I have measured out its body because of Indra.