+++
title = "077"

+++
77 (686)
Indra
Kurusuti Kāṇva
11 verses:  gāyatrī arranged in trcas 1–9; br ̥ hat ̥ ī 10, satobr̥hatī 11, arranged in a  pragātha
This hymn primarily treats the obscure Emuṣa myth, a boyhood deed of Indra’s.  As far as can be determined, in the R̥gvedic version (there are later Vedic prose ver sions, e.g., Taittirīya Saṃhitā VI.2.4.2–3) the just-born Indra, after a brief dialogue  with his mother, takes a bow named Bunda and kills a boar named Emuṣa, allow ing him to capture (or Viṣṇu to capture for him) a special mess of rice porridge, as  well as some buffalo, which he cooks for his father and mother. The most impor tant (and essentially only) R̥gvedic passages about this myth outside of VIII.77 are  I.61.7, VIII.45.4–5, VIII.69.14–15, and VIII.96.2.
Our hymn begins with Indra’s dialogue with his mother (vss. 1–2), a dialogue  found in the same words in VIII.45.4–5. Since in that passage Indra takes the  Bunda bow prior to questioning his mother, we can connect the first two verses  of this hymn with the story in verses 6–8, even though the Bunda bow is not men
tioned here in verses 1–2 and other material intervenes. Between the dialogue of  verses 1–2 and the rest of the story starting in verse 6 are several references to other  deeds of Indra’s, at least one of them (vs. 5) even more obscure than the Emuṣa  myth. It does seem likely, however, that the drinking of prodigious amounts of  soma in verse 4 is part of the Emuṣa story: in III.48, also about Indra’s boyhood  and his relationship to mother and father, he consumes vast amounts of soma  right after birth.
When the story is taken up again, we first are given a general summary of the  myth in 6ab, and then the first incident in the story, the taking of the Bunda bow,  in 6c. In our opinion, verse 8 is the speech of Indra’s mother, urging him to cap ture the porridge by means of the bow. Her “just born right now” (vs. 8c) echoes  the “just born” that begins verse 1, and these two phrases form a ring defining the  Emuṣa story. Verse 7 continues the story of the Bunda bow and the aiming of the  arrow. Verse 9, the final verse in the gāyatrī meter, is a standard summary of Indra’s  great deeds.
The last two verses (10–11) are in different meter. The first gives a précis of the  myth, introducing Viṣṇu’s role in securing the rice porridge, a detail that does not  appear in accord with verse 6. The final pāda of verse 10 identifies Indra’s opponent  as a boar (no mention of the boar in the earlier verses) and in its final word provides the boar’s name, Emuṣa, as the solution of the riddle. (The name Emuṣa occurs  only here in the R̥gveda.) The version given in verse 10 agrees better with the one in  I.61.7 than it does with the treatment in the rest of this hymn and indeed in the rest  of Maṇḍala VIII, which contains the other pertinent passages, and one wonders if  the poet was trying to harmonize two versions that he knew of this myth by tack
ing the Viṣṇu verse onto the Viṣṇu-less version found in the gāyatrī portion of the  hymn. The final verse (11) is a high rhetorical celebration of the Bunda bow and of  Indra’s arms that wield it.
## 1
Just born, the one of a hundred resolves asked his mother,
“Which ones are powerful; which ones are famed?”
## 2
Then she, the strong one [/Śavasī], named to him Aurṇavābha [/the  spider’s son] and Ahīśuva [/the one puffed up like a snake].
“Let them be (yours) to lay low, son.”
## 3
The Vr̥tra-smiter just hammered them together, like spokes in a nave  with a hammer.
When grown up, he became smiter of Dasyus.
## 4
At one shot he drank thirty ponds at once,
hogsheads [?] of soma—(did) Indra.
## 5
He bored through to the Gandharva in the bottomless dusky realms, to strengthen the composers of sacred formulations—(did) Indra.
## 6
He pierced (the boar Emuṣa), pierced the cooked rice porridge forth  from the mountains, and held it fast.
Indra (took) the well-stretched Bunda-bow.
## 7
Your arrow with a hundred ruddy glints and a thousand feathers was  the single one
that you made into your yokemate, o Indra.
## 8
[Indra’s mother:] “With it [=Bunda-bow] bring to the praisers, to the  superior men and to their ladies, (the rice porridge?) to eat,
though you were just born right now, o steadfast one of the R̥bhus.”
## 9
These highest exploits performed by you in profusion
you held fast with your whole heart.
## 10
All these things Viṣṇu brought here, the wide-striding one spurred on  by you:
a hundred buffaloes, a rice porridge cooked in milk—(when) Indra
(pierced) the boar Emuṣa.
## 11
Powerfully ruling, well-made, made of boar is your bow, the golden  Bunda, that aims straight.
Your two arms are fit for battle, well-equipped, increasing injury even  for one who protects himself from injury.
