+++
title = "078"

+++
78 (687)
Indra
Kurusuti Kāṇva
10 verses: gāyatrī, arranged in trcas 1–9, br ̥ hat ̥ ī 10
This hymn is all about greed. The first tr̥ca (vss. 1–3) barely mentions the offerings  we make to Indra in the haste to list the things we want in return, down to the  earrings in verse 3. The last tr̥ca (vss. 7–9) praises both Indra and Soma for their  (potential) generosity, and verse 9 gives another list of desired gifts. Verse 10, in a  different meter, may be the most egregious of all: the poet, picking up the desire he  expressed for grain in verse 9, tells Indra he plans to do no labor for his grain, but  expects Indra to deliver it, not only grown but processed—preferably stacked, but  at least mown. So Indra is expected to serve as farmhand! This verse may indirectly  express the stockbreeder’s disdain for agriculture.
The middle tr̥ca (vss. 4–6) contrasts somewhat with its surroundings. Though  the greed motif is found in verse 4, it is expressed in terms of Indra’s unique pow ers to increase wealth, to win goods, and to give them. The rhetorical pattern set  in this verse carries into the following verses, where the description of the god’s  powers becomes more general. However, the theme of the rest of the hymn is not  far from the surface, for Indra’s ability to see and to anticipate everything a mortal  might do would allow him to identify proper recipients and deny gifts to those who  behave badly.
## 01
(Taking pleasure) in the offering cake and of the soma-stalk, Indra, bring  here to us a thousand
and a hundred cows, o champion.
## 02
Bring here to us an ornament, a cow, a horse, an adornment,
along with golden jewelry.
## 03
And bring here to us many earrings, bold one,
for you are famed as a good one.
## 04
Never is another man within your abundance, Indra. There is no good  winner and no good giver
other than you for the cantor, o champion.
## 05
Never is Indra to be put down nor the able one to be circumvented. He hears and sees all.
## 06
Not to be outwitted, he watches out for the fury of mortals,
watches out before the insult (comes).
## 07
Full of resolve is the belly of the powerful, (booty-)apportioning,
Vr̥tra-smiting drinker of soma.
## 08
In you are goods united and all auspicious things, o Soma,
goods good for giving, not to go astray. 9. Just toward you does my desire hasten, seeking grain, seeking cattle,  seeking gold,
toward you, seeking horses.
## 10
With my hope on you, Indra, I never take scythe in hand.
Supply us with grain by the handful, whether just mown or already
stacked together, bounteous one.