+++
title = "079"

+++
79 (688) Soma
Krtnu Bh ̥ ārgava
9 verses: gāyatrī, except anuṣṭubh 9, probably arranged in trcas ̥
One of the rare hymns to Soma outside of the IXth Maṇḍala. None of the physical  or ceremonial properties of soma the substance, the ritual drink, is found in this  hymn. There is only indirect reference to the preparation of soma, in verse 3, where  the “body-makers,” presumably the priests who prepare the soma, are given shelter  from hatred, and in verse 4 soma is called “possessor of the silvery (drink) [that is,  soma itself],” an epithet otherwise almost exclusively used of Indra.
Instead of the ritual soma, we have here a portrait of an all-powerful and multi talented divine helper: a winner (vs. 1), a poet (vs. 1), a healer (vs. 2), a giver (vs. 5),  a finder of lost objects (vs. 6), and especially a protector from hostility (vss. 3, 4, 9).  Only in verse 8 is there any hint that Soma might ever be anything but benevolent  to us, but this hint is not developed.
## 1
Here is the effective gambler, ungraspable, all-conquering Soma, who got  the lucky break—
a seer, an inspired poet with poetic skill.
## 2
He covers over what is naked; he heals everything that is sick.
The blind man sees; the lame sets forth.
## 3
O Soma, for those who create your body [=soma-pressers] you hold out a  broad defense
from the hateful things done by others.
## 4
You possessor of the silvery drink—through your perception, through  your skills you keep away from heaven and earth
the hatred of any evil man.
## 5
And when those with (ritual) tasks proceed to their tasks, they will surely  reach the generosity of the giver,
should they (manage to) deflect the desire of the thirsting man.
## 6
He finds what was previously lost; he raises up the man who
follows truth.
He lengthens our (as yet) untraversed lifetime.

## 7
Very kindly to us, merciful, of undistracted resolve, unquenchable— be weal for our heart, o Soma.
## 8
Don’t agitate us, o Soma; don’t frighten us, o king.
Don’t smite our heart with turmoil.
## 9
When I behold malevolent thoughts of the gods in my own seat,
o king, ward off hateful things; you who give rewards, ward off failures.
The next group of hymns consists of 80–87, with three hymns to Indra (80–82),  one to the All Gods (83), one to Agni (84), and three to the Aśvins (85–87), all but  the last showing the appropriate descending number of verse. But 87 can in fact be  broken into two original hymns, to produce the proper sequence. The poets named  by the Anukramaṇī are various.