+++
title = "080"

+++
80 (689)
Indra (1–9), Gods (10)
Ekadyū Naudhasa
10 verses: gāyatrī, probably arranged in trcas, except final verse, tri ̥ ṣṭubh 10
The final pāda of this hymn (10d) is the same as the refrain in the verbally clever and  finely structured hymns of Nodhas Gautama in Maṇḍala I (I.58, 60–64). (R̥gveda  I.59 is also attributed to him, but lacks the refrain; see also nearby VIII.88.) The  patronymic of our poet (Naudhasa) identifies him as a descendant of Nodhas, and  he seems to have inherited some of his ancestor’s skill:  the tone of the hymn is  light and slangy, and he addresses Indra informally and with mocking exasperation,  especially in the second tr̥ca (vss. 4–6), in which the poet complains that Indra has  been slow to help his chariot in the race (see also vs. 8).
The poet seems to be withholding his highest praise for Indra until Indra has  earned it. He begins the hymn by announcing that he hasn’t chosen anyone else  for certain as his mercy-giver, and invites Indra to show mercy. He ends the hymn  proper (vs. 9) with a promise that Indra will be proclaimed as lord after he “makes  his fourth sacrificial name.” What these four names are is not at all certain, but  we suggest that the phrase forms a ring with the first verse, where the title/name  “mercy-giver” hasn’t yet been bestowed on the god. The poet is thus urging Indra  to perform the actions that will earn him the names that will attract sacrifice and  praise from mortals.
In the final verse, in a different meter, the poet names himself and reminds all the  gods (and goddesses, an unusual inclusion) that he has performed service for them,  demanding appropriate recompense.
## 01
Because I have not made anyone else my for-certain dispenser of mercy,  o you of a hundred resolves,
be merciful to us, Indra. 2. You who, not shirking, in the past, time after time, helped us to win  the prize,
be merciful to us, Indra.
## 03
Are you really one who rouses even the feeble, who are the helper of the  soma-presser?
Will you indeed muster your ability for us?
## 04
O Indra, possessor of the stone, advance our chariot even when it is behind; put it in front for me.
## 05
Blast it! Are you just going to sit there now? Put our chariot first for utmost fame that seeks the prize.
## 06
Help our chariot that seeks the prize. Easy for you to do. Why this  runaround?
Just make us victorious!
## 07
Indra, stand fast. You are a stronghold. The lucky woman goes to a  rendezvous with you—
this visionary thought conforming to her season [/the ritual sequence]. 8. Don’t make it [=chariot?] share in disgrace: the racecourse is wide, the  stake is set;
the elbows have been twisted outward [=driving posture?].
## 09
When you will make your fourth sacrificial name—this we eagerly  desire—
after that you will be solemnly proclaimed as our lord.
## 10
Ekadyū has strengthened you, you immortals; he has invigorated you,  you gods and you who are goddesses.
To him show generosity to be praised. – Early in the morning—soon— he should come, acquiring goods through his insight.