+++
title = "081"

+++
81 (690)
Indra
Kusīdin Kāṇva
9 verses: gāyatrī, arranged in trcas ̥
Though assigned to a different poet, this hymn, like the last one (VIII.81), addresses  Indra with a certain irreverence and informality, with multiple demands that Indra  seize goods and bring them to us, in addition to the usual praise of his power and  generosity. One verse is somewhat puzzling: the middle verse (5), in which Indra  seems to participate in the ritual in priestly roles as well as being the object of wor
ship, but this theme is not pursued.
## 01
Grab for us here a brilliant cattle-rich handful, o Indra,
who have great hands, with your right one.

## 02
For we know you as powerfully ranging, of powerful gifts, of powerful  bounty,
of powerful mass, with your help.
## 03
For when you wish to give, o champion, neither gods nor mortals
hinder you, anymore than they would a fearsome bull.
## 04
Come now! Let us praise Indra, the sovereign king who holds sway  over goods.
He will not neglect us with his generosity.
## 05
He will start up the praise; he will join in the singing; he will listen to the  sāman being sung.
He will greet it with generosity.
## 06
Bring to us with your right hand; seize with your left.
Indra, don’t deal us out of goods.
## 07
Hop to! Bring here boldly, bold one, for the peoples
the possessions of the very impious.
## 08
Indra, the prize that now is yours is to be won by the inspired poets. Win it with us.
## 09
Your all-glittering prizes come speeding in an instant to us.
They awaken at our will and right away.