+++
title = "082"

+++
82 (691)
Indra
Kusīdin Kāṇva
9 verses: gāyatrī, arranged in trcas ̥
This hymn is an insistent invitation to the soma sacrifice, punctuated by impera tives: “run,” “come here,” “drink,” and so forth, and larded with descriptions of the  soma in various stages of preparation. It is simple in diction and entirely focused  on the ritual situation and the hope for Indra’s arrival, save for the last verse (9),  which alludes briefly to the myth of the stealing of soma from heaven. The last tr̥ca  is marked by a refrain.
## 01
Run here from afar and from nearby, Vr̥tra-smiter,
in response to the proffering of the honey.
## 02
Sharp are the soma-drinks. Come here! The pressed drinks are ready to  exhilarate.
Drink heartily as you are accustomed.
## 03
Become exhilarated on the refreshment, and then in accord with your  desire and your fervor
it will become weal for your heart, Indra.
## 04
You without rival—here, come here! You are being called down to the hymns (while you are) in the highest luminous realm of heaven. 5. For you this one here has been pressed by stones, prepared with cows  [=milk], for exhilaration.
The soma is being poured forth, Indra.
## 06
Indra, hear my call. Reach the drinking and satiety
of the soma that has been pressed among us and provided with cows.
## 07
Indra, the soma in the beakers and in the cups that has been pressed  for you—
drink of it. You are master of it.
## 08
The soma that is seen in the cups, like the moon in the waters—
drink of it. You are master of it.
## 09
That which the falcon brought to you with his foot across the airy  realms—the one that could not be recaptured—
drink of it. You are master of it.