+++
title = "083"

+++
83 (692)
All Gods
Kusīdin Kāṇva
9 verses: gāyatrī, arranged in trcas ̥
The first two tr̥cas (vss. 1–6) of this hymn to the All Gods mention only the Ādityas  and are quite straightforward. The poet praises the help of these gods in the first  tr̥ca (vss. 1–3) and asks for valuables in the second (vss. 4–6). The final tr̥ca turns to  other gods (see esp. vs. 7) and to a more interesting topic: the ultimate kinship of  gods and men (vss. 7–8). The gods are reminded of this relationship presumably to  stimulate them to give help and goods.
## 01
We would choose the great help of the gods,
of the bulls, to aid us.
## 02
Let them be our yokemates always—Varuṇa, Mitra, Aryaman—
and forethoughtful strengtheners.
## 03
You carry us across many perils [?], as if across the waters with boats— you charioteers of truth.
## 04
Let there be a treasure for us, o Aryaman; a treasure worthy of praise,  o Varuṇa,
for we would choose a treasure.
## 05
For you forethoughtful ones, who care for the stranger, are holding sway  over a treasure.
What belongs to evil (shall) not (reach) it, o Ādityas.
## 06
O you of good gifts, we, whether dwelling peacefully or traveling on our route, call upon you, gods, for strengthening.
## 07
O Indra, Viṣṇu, Maruts, Aśvins—of these your common births with us take cognizance.

## 08
You of good gifts, now once again in the same way we bring to the fore  our brotherhood with you
in the womb of our mother.
## 09
For you of good gifts, with Indra preeminent—you are heaven-sent. And so I call just upon you.