+++
title = "084"

+++
84 (693)
Agni
Uśanā Kāvya
9 verses: gāyatrī, arranged in trcas ̥
This short and simple hymn to Agni makes no reference to his fiery qualities,  and only glancing ones to his ritual role: as guest in our houses (vs. 1) set here  by the gods (vs. 2). The most salient aspect of the hymn is the series of ques tions it contains: in the second tr̥ca (vss. 4–6) the poet asks what services we  should perform for Agni and how we should perform them (vss. 4–5); the final  tr̥ca (vss. 7–10) again begins with a question (vs. 7), this time about which poet  is the recipient of Agni’s poetic stimulation. The poet is clearly concerned  with producing the proper praise for the god; he mentions hymns or praises in  verses 3–7.
The Anukramaṇī names as the poet the legendary and mythic figure Uśanā Kāvya, to whom the three hymns IX.87–89 are also attributed. It is not clear why,  save for the mention of the kaví “sage poet” in verse 2.
## 1
The dearest guest will I praise for you—dear like an ally—
Agni, worth acquiring like a chariot,
## 2
Him, discerning like a sage poet, whom the gods now once again
have set down among mortals.
## 3
You, youngest one—protect pious men; listen to their hymns.
Guard their lineage along with their life.
## 4
In what fashion (shall we present) a praise invocation to you, o Agni,  Aṅgiras, child of nourishment,
(fit) for your desire, your fervor?
## 5
With our mind on what sacrifice might we do pious service, o youthful  (son) of strength?
And what shall I speak as homage here?
## 6
So that then you will make all dwellings lovely for us
and make our hymns have riches as their prize.
## 7
Whose thoughts in profusion do you now quicken, o houselord—
the man whose hymns are (presented) to you at the winning of
cattle? 8. They groom him, the very resolute one who goes in front at the
contests,
the prizewinner, in their own dwelling places.
## 9
He dwells peacefully in peaceful ways that bring success—whom no one  smites, but who himself smites.
O Agni, whoever is rich in heroes thrives.