+++
title = "086"

+++
86 (695)
Aśvins
Krṣ̥ ṇa Āṅgirasa or Viśvaka Kārṣṇi
5 verses: jagatī
This hymn clearly depicts a precise situation, with the poet Viśvaka making a direct  appeal to the Aśvins, but the particular nature of the situation is difficult to ascer tain. The two named men, Viśvaka and Viṣṇāpū, are found together three times else where, always in Aśvin context. In nearly identical Kakṣīvant passages (I.116.23,  117.7) the Aśvins “gave” (dadathuḥ) Viṣṇāpū to Kr̥ṣṇiya Viśvaka (Viṣṇāpū com pared to “a lost herd-animal” in 116.23); in X.65.12 they “let loose” (áva sr̥jathuḥ)  Viṣṇāpū to Viśvaka. The first verb occurs twice in our hymn (2b, 3b), though not  with a personal object; the other verb has a close synonym (mumócatam “release”)  in the refrain of all five verses. Thus, our hymn seems roughly to conform to the  other R̥gvedic occurrences of these personae. Unfortunately this is all we know  of the story: neither of the named men occurs in later texts, and though Geldner  provides a contextualizing narrative, himself relying on Sāyaṇa, with Viśvaka the  “grieved and deserted” (betrübte und verlassene) father who catches sight of his son,  a poet who had gone far away to seek his fortune, there is no real evidence for this  plot in the R̥gvedic passages—not even for the father–son relationship. Like many
of the Aśvin myths it is intriguing and probably ultimately unknowable. The Viśvaka/Viṣṇāpū episode seems only to occupy the first three verses, which  may form a tr̥ca, as Oldenberg suggests (Noten ad loc.). The last two verses (4–5)  retain the final-pāda refrain (of vss. 1–3), but omit the repeated c-pāda with its  mention of Viśvaka. The appeal to Indra for help (vs. 4) and the praise of truth (vs.  5) seem loosely attached to the rest of the hymn.
## 01
Since both of you are wondrous healers, embodying joy, and both of you  are (men) of skill and of speech,
Viśvaka calls upon you at the making of bodies [=sons?]. – Do not keep  us away from partnership with you. Release (him? [=Viṣṇāpū?])!
## 02
How shall one of expansive mind now offer praise to you? You two have  given insight (to me? Viṣṇāpū?) to seek a better state.
Viśvaka calls upon you at the making of bodies. – Do not keep us away  from partnership with you. Release (him?)!
## 03
Since you two have given this radiance to Viṣṇāpū to seek a better state, o  you who provide many enjoyments,
Viśvaka calls upon you at the making of bodies. – Do not keep us away  from partnership with you. Release (him?)!
## 04
And this hero, the winner of spoils and possessor of the silvery drink  [=Indra], do we call upon for help, even though he is at a distance,
upon him whose favor is sweetest like that of a father. – Do not keep us  away from partnership with you. Release (him?)!
## 05
By truth god Savitar performs his labors; the horn of truth is extended widely. The truth overpowers even those doing great battle. – Do not keep us  away from partnership with you. Release (him?)!