+++
title = "087"

+++
87 (696) Aśvins
Dyumnīka Vāsiṣṭha or Priyamedha Āṅgirasa or Krṣ̥ ṇa Āṅgirasa
6 verses: br̥hatī alternating with satobr̥hatī arranged in pragāthas
A typical and rather banal Aśvin hymn, with the simple message “come here, drink  the soma, give us aid and goods,” although there are a few striking images, espe cially in verse 1.
As Oldenberg (1888: 217) points out, this six-verse hymn, following a five-verse  hymn, violates the proper order, but, as he also points out, the first two pragāthas  are parallel in structure and phraseology, and may well form one four-verse hymn,  with the final pragātha (vss. 5–6) an originally separate hymn. Detaching the last  verses would restore an acceptable order, with a five-verse hymn (86), followed by  four- and two-verse hymns.
## 1
Brilliant is the praise song for you two, o Aśvins, like a blood-red  (horse) [?] at its outpouring. Come here!
This (outpouring) of pressed honey is dear to heaven, o men. Drink like  buffaloes at a salt-pocket.
## 2
Drink the honeyed hot milk, o Aśvins; sit here on the ritual grass, o men. Reaching exhilaration here in the dwelling of Manu, protect our vital  energy along with our property.
## 3
The Priyamedhas have called you here with all your forms of help. Drive your course right up to the pleasing sacrifice of the man who has  twisted the ritual grass at the rituals of daybreak.
## 4
Drink the honeyed soma, o Aśvins; sit close together on the ritual grass. Having grown strong, come from heaven right up to our good praise, like  buffaloes to a salt-pocket.
## 5
Now drive here with your horses frothing at the mouth, o Aśvins.
O wondrous ones of golden course, o lords of beauty, strong through  truth, drink the soma.
## 6
Because we inspired poets in our admiration call upon you to win  the prize,
you two, agreeable, wondrous, and possessed of many wonders—come  here with insight and attentive hearing, o Aśvins.
Oldenberg groups the four Indra hymns 88–91 together, though their numbers of  verses do not conform to the expected sequence.
