+++
title = "089"

+++
89 (698) Indra
Nr̥medha  Āṅgirasa and Purumedha Āṅgirasa
7 verses: br̥hatī alternating with satobr̥hatī, arranged in pragāthas 1–4; anuṣtubh 5–6,  br̥hatī 7, arranged in a trcḁ
The signature word of this hymn is br̥hánt “lofty”: it is the first and last word of the  hymn, and appears in every verse except the two anuṣṭubh verses (5–6). (Note that the  names of the other two meters in the hymn, br̥hatī and satobr̥hatī, contain a form of  this word as well.) The theme of the hymn is the Vr̥tra battle and the singing of the  Maruts that strengthens and inspires Indra for the battle. The middle verse (4) is quite  possibly the Maruts’ direct address to Indra, the sacred formulation (bráhman—note  the phonological similarity to br̥hánt) mentioned in the previous verse (3).
The hymn begins and ends with an exhortation to produce a song or hymn for  Indra. In verse 1 it is explicitly the Maruts who are thus urged (so also vs. 3), but  in the last half of verse 7 the addressees are not identified (though they must be  plural, unlike the singular “you” of 7ab). This lack of referent allows the verse to  be interpreted in two ways—as a further address to the Maruts or as an address to  the human poets—and this in turn allows the Maruts and the poets to be identified  with each other and allows the current ritual to acquire the resonance of a divine  correspondent. The ritual context is clear from the beginning: in verse 1 the gen eration of the light suggests the dawn sacrifice; in 6ab the creation of the sacrifice  and its elements are Indra’s recompense for his cosmogonic deeds; and in 7cd the  mention of the heated gharma pot evokes a particular ritual, the Pravargya, which  involves heating milk to boiling—milk that may be indirectly alluded to in 7a.
The hymn is also notable for what it lacks: any request for aid or riches. It is that  very rare thing in the R̥gveda, a pure hymn of praise. It is also nicely crafted, with  balanced rhetorical responsions and variations and phonological and morphologi cal play throughout, in deceptively direct and simple language.
## 1
For Indra, o Maruts, sing the lofty (sāman) that best smites Vr̥tra, with which those who are strong through truth [=Maruts or gods] gave  birth to the light, god(like) and wakeful, for the god.
## 2
The smiter of malediction blew away the interdictions. Then brilliant  Indra was at hand.
The gods yielded themselves to partnership with you, Indra—you of  lofty radiance, with the Maruts as your flock.
## 3
To lofty Indra, o Maruts, chant your sacred formulation.
He will smite Vr̥tra—the Vr̥tra-smiter of a hundred resolves—with his  mace of a hundred joints.
## 4
[Maruts:] “Bear down boldly, you of bold mind: there will be lofty fame  for you.
Let the waters, the mothers, flow apart at speed. You will smite Vr̥tra;  you will win the sun.”

## 5
When you were born for the smiting of Vr̥tra, you bounteous one  without predecessor,
then you spread out the earth, and then you propped up heaven.
## 6
Then the sacrifice was born for you, then the chant and (the fire’s)  “laughter.”
You dominate all this, what has been born and what is to be born.
## 7
You brought the cooked (milk) into the raw (cows); you made the sun  mount in heaven.
[To singers/Maruts:] Like the gharma pot when the sāman (is sung), heat  the lofty (song) enjoyable to the one who yearns for song, with its
well-twisted ornaments.