+++
title = "090"

+++
90 (699)
Indra
Nr̥medha  Āṅgirasa and Purumedha Āṅgirasa
6 verses: br̥hatī alternating with satobr̥hatī, arranged in pragāthas
Indra as the powerful smiter of obstacles is called to our sacrifice and begged for  aid in battle and for riches. There is nothing particularly remarkable in this hymn  except for verse 5, where there appears to be an obscure reference to Varuṇa as  the “sustainer of domains,” who concedes various unopposable obstacles to Indra.  This epithet, carṣaṇī-dhŕ̥t, is actually more often used of Indra than of other gods,  but Varuṇa is also so called (IV.1.2, twice), and a telling passage, VII.85.3, describes  an amicable division of labor between Indra, who smashes unopposable obstacles,  and Varuṇa, who sustains the peoples, in almost identical phraseology to our verse  5. What then does “concede” mean in our passage? Most likely, in our view, that  Varuṇa concedes the sphere of warfare and martial defense to Indra, while con tinuing to perform his own task of assuring orderly existence in times and places  of peace.
## 1
Let Indra, who is to be invoked, tend to all our battles.
Let the Vr̥tra-smiter attend upon our sacred formulations and our
pressings—he who has the highest overwhelming power, who is equal  to song.
## 2
You are the foremost giver of bounties; you are the real thing, the one  who performs the master’s part.
We would choose to be the associates of the powerfully brilliant son of  strength, of the great one.
## 3
The unsurpassable sacred formulations are being performed for you, o  Indra who yearn for song.
Take pleasure in these “teams,” o possessor of fallow bays, which we  have thought up for you, Indra. 4. For you, bounteous one, the real thing who cannot be bowed, bear down  on many obstacles.
You, o strongest one with mace in hand—bring wealth nearby for the  pious man.
## 5
You, Indra, are the glorious possessor of the silvery drink, o lord of  strength.
You, all alone, smite the unopposable obstacles that have been conceded  by the one who sustains the domains [=Varuṇa?].
## 6
You, o lord, the forethoughtful one, do we now beseech for bounty, as we  would beseech Bhaga for a portion.
Your shelter is like a great hide, Indra. May your benevolent thoughts  reach us.