+++
title = "091"

+++
91 (700)
Indra
Apālā Ātreyī
7 verses; paṅkti 1–2, anuṣṭubh 3–7
This deceptively simple, and much discussed, hymn consists of a monologue  embedded in a charm for healing and fertility. Unusually the speaker is an unmar ried girl, who undertakes a clandestine soma ritual for Indra, with erotic over tones, in ultimate preparation for her marriage. It begins with a contextualizing  introduction (vs. 1a–c): a maiden going to fetch water finds soma on her way.  She brings it home and addresses first the soma and then Indra. She announces  to soma her intention to press it (1de):  as it turns out she presses it with her  own mouth (2c) and offers it to Indra along with all the accoutrements of a real  soma sacrifice (vs. 2). Indra arrives for the soma, and she seeks to understand his  intentions, even as she assures him that she will keep his presence a secret (3ab). The  lexeme translated “recite” (ádhi √i) is an item of pedagogical vocabulary, appro priate to her age and stage of life, and refers to students’ oral recitation of their  lessons; in this context it seems to mean “reveal your presence verbally.” She then  urges the soma to flow softly, in contrast to the excessive noise usually associated  with soma’s preparation (3cd). In verse 4 she tremulously speculates to herself  about whether Indra will be able to achieve what she wants from her private  soma-pressing, and worries, as an adolescent girl apprehensive about sexual ity and marriage, about sexual intercourse with Indra, a rather formidable first  sexual partner, one might think. In the next two verses (5–6) she expresses her  wishes—three different types of hair growth: on the fields, that is, plants; on her  father’s bald head; and on her “belly,” the last wish indicating a desire for pubic  hair as a sign of sexual maturity. Apālā’s words end here; the final verse says  nothing directly about whether Indra fulfilled her expressed wishes (though we  take it as implying that he did), but simply states that he purified her by pulling

her through increasingly smaller holes, rendering her “sun-skinned,” quite pos sibly a reference to the curing of teenage acne, a frequent accompaniment to the  entry into sexual maturity.
This R̥gvedic hymn is extensively quoted and embedded in a prose narrative in  the Jaiminīya Brāhmaṇa (I.220–21). For detailed discussion of this hymn and its  middle Vedic version, see Jamison (1991: 149–51, 165–67). That account and this  translation are deeply indebted to and dependent upon the ground-breaking discus
sion by Hanns-Peter Schmidt in chapter 1 “The Affliction of Apālā (R̥gveda 8.91)”  in his 1987 Some Women’s Rites and Rights in the Veda (pp. 1–29).
## 01
A maiden going down to the water found soma along the way.
Bringing it home she said, “I will press you for Indra; I will press you for  the able one.
## 02
“You over there, the dear little hero who goes earnestly looking from  house to house,
drink this (soma), pressed by the jaws—(soma) accompanied by grain,  by gruel, by cakes, by hymns.
## 03
“We wish to comprehend you; we will not ‘recite’ you aloud.
Softly-like, ever so softly-like, o drop, flow around for Indra.
## 04
“Will he be able? Will he do it? Will he make us better off?
Shall we, though coming as husband-haters, unite with Indra?
## 05
“Indra, make these three surfaces grow forth—
the head of my Papa, the field, and this on my belly.
## 06
“That field of ours, this body of mine,
and my Papa’s head—make all these hairy.”
## 07
In the nave of a chariot, in the nave of a wagon, in the nave of a yoke, o  Indra of a hundred resolves,
having purified Apālā three times, you made (her) sun-skinned.
The next three hymns, 92–94, should be grouped together, according to Oldenberg  (1888: 218).