+++
title = "092"

+++
92 (701)
Indra
Śrutakakṣa Āṅgirasa or Sukakṣa Āṅgirasa
33 verses: gāyatrī, except anuṣṭubh 1, arranged in trcas ̥
This long, loosely structured hymn is essentially a constantly repeated invitation to  Indra to come to the soma sacrifice. Although the poet does ask for aid from time  to time, the focus is on the sacrifice, the verbal accompaniments, and the soma itself.  The poet names himself (or nicknames himself: the name is Śrutakakṣa “having a famous armpit” [or a famous crotch]) in verse 25. This nickname appears in the  midst of a striking sequence using the adverb áram “fitting(ly)” (vss. 24–27) in a  clever shift implicitly equating Indra’s body parts (e.g., “fit for your cheek” vs. 24a)  with the gifts the poet hopes to receive (e.g., “fit for a horse” vs. 25a), at least once  punningly: verse 35c, where the word dhā́mane can refer both to a body part, the  “fundament,” that is, the buttocks, and to Indra’s conferring of gifts.
## 1
Sing (him) here to the drinking of your stalk; sing forth to Indra, the all-conquering one, of a hundred resolves, most liberal to the settled  domains,
## 2
Much-invoked, much-praised leader of song, famed of old—
call him, “Indra!”
## 3
It’s Indra who is the giver to us of great prizes, the dancer.
The great one, in a crouch [=driving posture], will guide (the
prizes) here.
## 4
The belipped one has drunk of the stalk conferring good skill,
accompanied by oblations,
of the drop mixed with grain—has Indra.
## 5
Chant forth to him, to Indra, to drink the soma,
for that is his strengthening.
## 6
Having drunk of this god here, of his exhilarating drinks, the god with  his power
will surmount all beings.
## 7
Him, entirely victorious, held in place amid all your hymns
you will rouse for help—
## 8
The soma-drinker who is an unassailable fighter who cannot be budged, a superior man of unobstructable resolve.
## 9
Do your best for wealth for us, as one knowing many things, o Indra,  you who are equal to song.
Help us in the decisive (contest for) spoils.
## 10
Even from yonder, Indra, drive up close to us with hundred-prized, thousand-prized refreshment.
## 11
Let’s go to the visionary thoughts of our visionary poet; with (the  thoughts as) our steeds, o able one who breaks out the cows,
might we conquer in battles, o possessor of the mace.
## 12
We will make you take pleasure in our hymns, o you of a hundred  resolves,
as cows do in their pastures.
## 13
Because all things in the mortal way are in accord with your desire, o  you of a hundred resolves,
we have arrived at our hopes, possessor of the mace.

## 14
To you, o son of strength, the desirers of desires have turned. Nothing surpasses you, Indra.
## 15
O bull, give aid to us with the awesome, dashing
visionary thought that gains the most, and with plenitude.
## 16
O Indra of a hundred resolves, that which now is the most brilliant  exhilaration for you,
with that you should now become exhilarated on the
exhilarating drink—
## 17
That of yours which possesses the brightest fame, which is the best  smiter of Vr̥tra, Indra,
that exhilaration which best gives strength.
## 18
For we know what of yours was given by you—possessor of the stone,  real drinker of soma—
to all communities, wondrous one.
## 19
Let our hymns encircle with rhythm the soma pressed for Indra for  exhilaration.
Let the bards chant their chant.
## 20
He in whom are all splendors, in whom the seven who sit together  [=priests] take pleasure,
Indra do we invoke when the soma is pressed.
## 21
The gods have stretched for themselves a noteworthy sacrifice among  the Trikadrukas.
Just him [=Indra] let our hymns increase.
## 22
Let the drops enter you, like rivers the sea.
Nothing surpasses you, Indra.
## 23
O wakeful bull, with your greatness you encompass the portion of soma that is in your belly, Indra.
## 24
Let the soma be fit for your cheek, o Indra, Vr̥tra-smiter,
fit for your “fundament” the drops.
## 25
Śrutakakṣa [“Famous Armpit”] sings fit for a horse, fit for a cow, fit for the “fundament” [/bestowal] of Indra.
## 26
For fittingly you exert yourself when our soma drinks are
pressed, Indra,
fittingly for your giving, able one.
## 27
Even from a distance our hymns reach you, possessor of the stone. Let us go fittingly to you.
## 28
For as surely as you are one who acts the hero and as surely as you are a  steadfast champion,
just as surely is your thought to be realized— 29. Just as surely has your giving, powerfully liberal one, been ordained by  all the Ordainers.
And so, Indra, (you are) in partnership with me.
## 30
Do not become like an indolent formulator, o lord of prizes.
Exhilarate yourself on the pressed soma accompanied by cows [=milk].
## 31
Let not (ill) intentions toward us guide us away from the sun into the  nights, Indra.
With you as yokemate, we would gain it.
## 32
With just you as yokemate, Indra, we would respond to the challengers. You are ours; we are yours.
## 33
For those seeking you, ever bellowing after you, will proceed just  to you—
your comrades, the bards, o Indra.