+++
title = "093"

+++
93 (702)
Indra (except Indra and R̥bhus 34)
Sukakṣa Āṅgirasa
34 verses: gāyatrī, arranged in trcas ̥
This long hymn begins with an address to the rising sun (vs. 1), which is echoed in  the first verse of the second tr̥ca (vs. 4 ), and near its end are two verses directed  to Agni (vss. 25–26). These paired addresses to other deities within an Indra hymn  suggest the ritual context of a dawn soma sacrifice (though Dawn herself is not  alluded to). Indeed, the soma offered to Indra is the dominant theme of the hymn,  which becomes more insistent as the hymn progresses. Not surprisingly, mention of  the aid and material wealth he will give in return for the soma is also not scanted.
Throughout the hymn Indra is especially celebrated as (best) Vr̥tra-smiter: the  simple epithet and its superlative form occur an astonishing nine times, even though  the myth itself is treated only sparingly (vss. 2, 7, 14–15).
As often, the tr̥cas become more tightly organized toward the end of the hymn, with  a partial refrain in verses 25–27, and full-pāda refrains in 28–30 and 31–33, the latter  being introduced (31a) by the same pāda that provides the refrain (31–33c). There are  also intra- and inter-tr̥ca verbal echoes in these later verses. The separate final verse (34)  mentioning the R̥bhus seems to have little or no connection to the rest of the hymn.
## 1
Up toward the bull whose bounty is famous, who performs manly work, toward the archer do you go, o Sun.
## 2
He who split the nine and ninety strongholds with his arm-strong (mace), and as Vr̥tra-smiter smote the serpent,
## 3
That Indra, propitious companion, will milk out for us (wealth) in  horses, in cows, in grain,
like (a cow) yielding a broad stream.1194 VIII.93
## 4
O Vr̥tra-smiter—whatever today you have risen over, o Sun, all that is under your will, Indra.
## 5
Or if, o lord of settlements grown strong, you think, “I shall not die,” just that comes true for you.
## 6
The soma drinks which have been pressed in the distance, which nearby, to all those do you go, Indra.
## 7
We incite this Indra to smite great Vr̥tra.
He will become a bullish bull.
## 8
Indra is the one made for giving. Strongest is he when ensconced in  exhilaration;
brilliant is he who, deserving of soma, receives the (invitatory) call. 9. Like a mace equipped with a hymn, powerful, not to be budged, he has waxed high, not to be laid low.
## 10
Even in difficult going, make easy passage for us when you are hymned,  o Indra who yearn for hymns,
if you will so desire, bounteous one—
## 11
You whose aim, whose sovereignty they never confound—
neither god, nor the exalted folk.
## 12
And the two goddesses, both the World-Halves,
respect your unrepulsable forcefulness, o you of good lips.
## 13
You fixed this fast in the black (cows) and in the reddish ones, and in the gray ones—the gleaming white milk.
## 14
Then as all the gods strode away from the turbulent power of the serpent, the onslaught of the wild beast found them.
## 15
And after that he became a covering for me: the Vr̥tra-smiter displayed  his masculine nature—
he for whom no rival has been born, he who cannot be laid low.
## 16
Him famed as the best smiter of Vr̥tra, the propelling force of the  settled peoples,
do I inspire to great generosity to you (patrons).
## 17
(I inspired you, Indra,) with this visionary thought and with desire for  cattle—o you of many names, praised by many—
so that you appeared at every soma-pressing.
## 18
Let him be of attentive mind just toward us—the Vr̥tra-smiter  possessing many pressed drinks.
Let the able one listen to our prayer.
## 19
(Coming) with what help for us do you reach exhilaration, bull? With what (help) for the pressers? Bring it here!
## 20
In whose pressed soma does the bullish bull with his teams take pleasure, the Vr̥tra-smiter, for soma-drinking? 21. On reaching exhilaration, (bring) wealth in thousands to us.
Become a provider to the pious man.
## 22
These pressed drinks here, accompanied by their wives [=waters], go  eagerly in pursuit.
Regularly coming, ever filling [?] is (the wave) of the waters.
## 23
The desirable [/offered] libations, strengthening Indra at the ceremony,  have surged
to his down-stroke with their power.
## 24
Hither let these two feasting companions, the pair of fallow bays with  golden manes,
convey (you) to the pleasure set out (for you).
## 25
For you have these soma drinks here been pressed and the ritual grass  strewn, o you of radiant goods [=Agni].
Convey Indra hither for the praisers—
## 26
(Agni,) as you diffuse your skill through the luminous realms and  distribute treasures to the pious man.
(All of you,) recite to Indra for the praisers.
## 27
I establish here your Indrian strength and set out all solemn words for  you, o you of a hundred resolves.
Be merciful, Indra, to the praisers.
## 28
Bring us every good thing, every refreshment and nourishment, o you  of a hundred resolves,
when you will show us mercy, Indra.
## 29
Bring us all welfare, o you of a hundred resolves,
when you will show us mercy, Indra.
## 30
We who have pressed soma call upon just you, best smiter of Vr̥tra, when you will show us mercy, Indra.
## 31
Right up to our pressed soma with your fallow bays—drive, o lord of  exhilarating drinks—
right up to our pressed soma with your fallow bays.
## 32
He who is known, now as before, as Indra, best smiter of Vr̥tra,  possessing a hundred resolves—
right up to our pressed soma with your fallow bays.
## 33
For you, Vr̥tra-smiter, are the drinker of these soma-drinks—
right up to our pressed soma with your fallow bays.
## 34
Let Indra give us the wealth belonging to craft [/R̥bhu] as the
craftsmaster [/R̥bhukṣan] for our refreshment.
Let the prizewinner give a prizewinner.
