+++
title = "094"

+++
94 (703)
Maruts
Bindu Āṅgirasa or Pūtadakṣa Āṅgirasa
12 verses: gāyatrī, arranged in trcas ̥
This hymn, focused on soma-drinking, is a curious mix of almost vapid simplic ity and baffling obscurity. Although the Anukramaṇī assigns the whole hymn to  the Maruts, it has several features that deviate markedly from the general pattern  of Marut hymns. To begin with the clearest, the second tr̥ca (vss. 4–6) names a  number of gods as drinkers of the soma being presented: not only the Maruts (vs.  4), but the Aśvins (vs. 4), Indra (vs. 6), and the Ādityas, both as a body (vs. 4) and  separately (vs. 5). By contrast, in the remaining tr̥cas (vss. 7–9, 10–12) only the  Maruts are mentioned, but they are several times qualified by epithets and actions  that are ordinarily the province of other gods: for example, “having refined skill”  (vss. 7 and 10), generally used of one or more of the Ādityas; “mountain-dwell
ing” (vs. 12), usually of Soma. Since the lexicon of Marut hymns is often tightly  limited, this borrowing of attributes is somewhat remarkable. Similarly the cos mogonic acts of spreading out the cosmic realms (vs. 9) and propping apart the  two world-halves (vs. 11) are Indra’s signature deeds, not otherwise attributed to  the Maruts.
It is the first tr̥ca (vss. 1–3) that is the most problematic, however. It ends  (vs. 3c) exactly as the third tr̥ca ends (9c), and with a variant of the formula  found in all three verses of the final tr̥ca (vss. 10–12), in all cases inviting “the  Maruts to drink the soma.” But the hymn begins with a paradox (vs. 1), a cow  who herself sucks rather than giving suck, a cow identified as the mother of the  Maruts and also, in a sharply different animal metaphor, as the draft-horse of  their chariots. In the second verse this female figure seems to transform into, or  be identified with, Aditi: “the lap of Aditi” is a common phrase. It is this idiom  that gives some clue as to the intent of the first two verses. “The lap of Aditi”  seems elsewhere to refer to the ritual ground, or some part of it or some vessel  associated with it, and soma is prepared or deposited in this lap. The statement  that “the gods cause their commandments to be upheld” in this lap is a way  of saying that the ritual activities of mortals sacrificing to the gods keep the  cosmos functioning, so that, for example, the sun and the moon can be seen.  As for the first verse, Pr̥śni, the mother of the Maruts, is in a few mysterious  passages (notably IV.5.7, 10) also apparently identified with some part of the  ritual ground or equipment, and so Aditi (in “the lap of Aditi”) and Pr̥śni can  be superimposed on each other. If “the cow” of verse 1 is the ritual ground  (or some part thereof or piece thereon) as Pr̥śni, she “sucks” by receiving the  oblation, and she is the draft-horse of the Maruts’ chariots in providing the  occasion for their journey.
The identification of the Maruts’ mother with Aditi in the first tr̥ca and the  ascription to them of epithets and activities characteristic of other gods in the rest of the hymn presumably stem from the same motive: to universalize the Maruts and  make them a species of All Gods.
## 01
The cow herself takes suck, the fame-seeking mother of the bounteous  Maruts;
she is yoked as the draft-horse of their chariots,
## 02
She in whose lap all the gods cause their commandments to be upheld, for the sun and moon to be seen.
## 03
So then do all our bards sing them here, away from (the sacrifice of) the  stranger—
the Maruts to drink the soma.
## 04
Here it is—this pressed soma. They drink of it—the Maruts,
and also the self-ruling ones [=Ādityas] and the Aśvins.
## 05
They drink—Mitra, Aryaman, Varuṇa—of the one purified in a  continuous (stream),
which possesses three seats and grants offspring.
## 06
And now at pleasure Indra (drinks) of it, of the pressed one with its  cows [=milk-mixture];
early in the morning he will become exhilarated like a Hotar.
## 07
Have the patrons [=Maruts] grown excited? Like the waters they rush  beyond failures,
the (Maruts) of refined skill.
## 08
Do I today choose the help of you gods, who are great
and by nature of wondrous luster?
## 09
Those who spread all the earthly realms here and the luminous
realms of heaven, (I call)
the Maruts to drink the soma.
## 10
Just these of refined skill—you, o Maruts—from heaven I now call, to drink of this soma.
## 11
Just these, who propped apart the two world-halves, the Maruts  I now call,
to drink of this soma.
## 12
Just this, the bullish mountain-dwelling Marut flock, I now call,
to drink of this soma.
Oldenberg collects the hymns 95–101 into a single group, despite the varying num ber of verses and the lack of other clear unifying features.
