+++
title = "095"

+++
95 (704) Indra
Tiraścī Āṅgirasa
9 verses: anuṣṭubh, arranged in trcas ̥
A simple hymn in which the poet, who names himself in verse 4, both urges Indra  to come to the soma sacrifice to enjoy the soma and the words of praise offered to  him and exhorts his fellow celebrants to redouble their praises. The most notable  feature of the hymn is the last tr̥ca (vss. 7–9), with its inescapable repetition of the  word śuddhá “cleansed, washed,” applied not merely to the soma but also to its ver
bal accompaniments, as well as to Indra and the help he will bring. This verb is not  a standard part of soma vocabulary: it is used only once in Maṇḍala IX (IX.78.1),  where it refers to the washing of the soma plant before its pressing. The verb is in  general rare: almost all of its R̥gvedic attestations are found in the last three verses  of this hymn. In the few other occurrences where the nature of the action can be  determined, water is the agent, and it is clear that washing is the literal meaning of  the verb and the metaphor deployed in this hymn.
## 1
Like a charioteer (his chariot), the songs have mounted you at the  pressings, o you who long for songs.
In unison they have bellowed to you, Indra, like mothers to their calf. 2. The clear pressed (soma drinks) have roused you hither, o Indra who  long for songs.
Drink of this stalk, Indra: it has been set for you among all (the clans). 3. Drink the soma for exhilaration, Indra, the pressed soma brought by the  falcon,
for you are the lord, the king of each and every clan.
## 4
Hear the call of Tiraścī, who honors you, Indra.
Grant fullness of wealth in good heroes and in cows. You are great.
## 5
(Hear the call of Tiraścī,) who has begotten for you, Indra, a newer,  invigorating hymn,
a visionary thought stemming from a perceptive mind, an age-old vision  swollen with truth.
## 6
Let us praise him—Indra, whom the songs and solemn words have  strengthened.
Seeking to gain them, may we win his many manly powers.
## 7
Come now! Let us praise Indra the cleansed with a cleansed sāman. Him grown strong through cleansed hymns let the cleansed (soma) with  its milk-mixture exhilarate.
## 8
O Indra—cleansed, come here to us; (come) cleansed with cleansed help. Cleansed, lay down a foundation of wealth; cleansed, become
exhilarated as the one deserving of soma. 9. For, o Indra, cleansed, (you lay down) wealth for us, cleansed, (you lay  down) treasures for the pious man.
Cleansed, you keep smashing obstacles, cleansed, you seek to gain
the prize.