+++
title = "096"

+++
96 (705)
Indra (except Maruts 14d, Indra and Br̥haspati 15)
Tiraścī Āṅgirasa or Dyutāna Māruti
21 verses: triṣṭubh except virāj 4, arranged in trcas ̥
A rich and complex hymn containing both glancing references and vivid treatments  of several Indra myths. Its parts conform well to the tr̥ca structure, especially (as  often) toward the end. Each of the last four tr̥cas (vss. 10–21) has a verbal signa ture: in verses 10–12 the half-pāda refrain “surely he will take cognizance” (kuvíd  aṅgá védat); in verses 13–15 the “droplet” (drapsá); in verses 16–18 the opening “you
then” (tuváṃ ha tyád); in verses 19–21 the definitional “Vr̥tra-smiter” (vr̥trahā́). The first tr̥ca of the hymn (vss. 1–3) sets the stage for the wide-ranging praise  of Indra by describing his overwhelming power in three different areas. In verse 1  the powers of nature are subject to him. Verse 2 apparently contains a snatch of  the Emuṣa myth, most extensively related in VIII.71. In that myth Indra shoots a  boar named Emuṣa through many mountains; here only the mountains and the  arrow-shot are mentioned, but the prodigious nature of the unnamed archer’s  action is clear, and the audience would be aware that this was a boyhood deed of  Indra’s. In verse 3 Indra’s body is described as the site of his powers, both physical  and mental.
The second tr̥ca (vss. 4–6) begins with a summary of his preeminence (vs. 4),  but soon moves to the Vr̥tra battle (vs. 5) and especially to the Maruts’ role in it, a  topic that will also occupy the third tr̥ca. The Maruts appear to be the “formula tors” (brahmáns) introduced at the end of verse 5, bellowing to Indra. Verses 6–9  are best interpreted as the direct speech of the Maruts to Indra, offering him their  praise while seeking an alliance with him. They remind him (vs. 7) that they stuck  and continue to stick by him when the other gods deserted him in the Vr̥tra battle,  and they put in their claim to share the sacrifice with him (vs. 8), a claim also vividly  dramatized in the dialogue hymn I.165. They end their speech (vs. 9) with the reas
surance that together they, the Maruts and Indra, will make an unbeatable team. The next tr̥ca (vss. 10–12) returns to the ritual present, with the poet’s exhorta tion to himself to produce well-crafted words for Indra—whose attention to the  praises he nervously hopes for. The following tr̥ca (vss. 13–15) is the most puz zling part of the hymn; it concerns an otherwise unknown story about a “droplet”  (drapsá) or perhaps an individual (human? divine? semi-divine?) so named. There is  a conflict of some sort in the Aṃśumatī River, which Indra appears to win in verse  15. The middle verse of the tr̥ca (vs. 14) is 1st-person direct speech and may be the

words of Indra addressing the Maruts. But the “story” may also be an extended  ritual metaphor. “Droplet” is a word also used of soma, and the name of the river  means literally “possessing (soma) plants.” The descent of the droplet into the river  could well describe the rinsing of the soma plant that forms a regular part of soma  preparation, although the ritual counterpart of the mythic conflict is difficult to  identify.
Unified by its opening words “you then,” the next tr̥ca (vss. 16–18) provides  a survey of some of Indra’s great deeds, some obscure (like the rivalry with the  unidentified seven in vs. 16), some familiar: the defeat of Śuṣṇa (17c), the release  of the cows from Vala (17d), and the Vr̥tra battle again (18). The last tr̥ca begins  with a riddle, though not a very challenging one. The first three pādas of verse 19  give a series of definitional descriptors of a hero. Those asked the riddle give their  answer to “the other,” in our opinion the riddler himself: “That’s the Vr̥tra-smiter!”  And they provide other embellishments to the Vr̥tra-smiter in the following two  verses (20–21), while declaring the need to invoke and praise him. The hymn thus  keeps returning to the Vr̥tra battle, and the final three verses implicitly assert that  Vr̥tra-smiter is Indra’s fundamental role.
## 01
For him do the dawns pass along their course; for Indra do the eloquent  evenings (pass along their course) by night.
For him do the waters, the seven mothers, stand still—the rivers easy to  cross, for men to traverse.
## 02
They were pierced through by the archer, though he wavered—the thrice  seven backs of the mountains fitted firmly together.
No god nor mortal could surpass this—(the deeds) that the bull, grown  strong, performed.
## 03
The metal mace is an appendage of Indra; greatest power is in the two  arms of Indra.
The intentions of Indra are in his head exclusively; into his mouth they  rush en masse, to (become speech) worthy to be heard.
## 04
I consider you the most worthy of the sacrifice of those worthy of the  sacrifice; I consider you the stirrer of the unstirrable;
I consider you the beacon of warriors, Indra; I consider you the bull of  the settled domains.
## 05
When, o Indra, in your two arms you took the mace stirred by
exhilaration, to smite the serpent,
the mountains bellowed forth, and forth the cows, forth the formulators  [=Maruts] approaching Indra.
## 06
[Maruts:] “Let us praise him, who begat all these creatures here
below him.
We would like to establish an alliance with Indra with our hymns; we  would come near the bull with reverences.” 7. [Maruts:] “Shrinking from the hissing of Vr̥tra, all the gods who were  your partners deserted you.
Let your partnership be with the Maruts, Indra. Then you will win all  these battles here.”
## 08
[Maruts:] “We, the thrice sixty Maruts, having increased you as ruddy  throngs [=herds of cattle] increase, are deserving of the sacrifice.
We reverently approach you. Make a share for us. We would honor
your unbridled force with this oblation.”
## 09
[Maruts:] “Sharp is the weapon, the vanguard of the Maruts. (And)  who dares venture against your mace, Indra?
The lords lacking gods are weapon-less. With your wheel [=discus?]
scatter them, possessor of the silvery drink.”
## 10
For the great, strong, powerful one, for the one most propitious to cattle  send forth a well-twisted (hymn).
Produce many hymns for Indra whose vehicle is songs, for his body.
Surely he will take cognizance (of them)?
## 11
To him whose vehicle is hymns, to the far-ranging one send an inspired  thought like (a boat) to the far shore of rivers with a wooden
(paddle).
Stroke the body of the famous, very enjoyable one with a visionary
thought. Surely he will take cognizance (of it)?
## 12
Labor at what Indra will enjoy from you. Give as praise a good praise  hymn. Seek to entice him here with reverence.
Be attentive, singer. Don’t screech, but make your speech heard. Surely  he will take cognizance (of it)?
## 13
The Droplet descended into the Aṃśumatī (River), the black one  speeding with the ten thousand.
Indra with his skill helped him as he blew. The manly minded one
repelled the “blizzards” (of attacking warriors?).
## 14
“I saw the Droplet wandering in the oscillating eddy of the
Aṃśumatī River,
descending like a black cloud. I dispatch you, bulls. Fight in the
contest.”
## 15
Then the Droplet held his body in the lap of the Aṃśumatī, as he  glittered.
With Br̥haspati as yokemate, Indra overcame the godless clans as they  attacked.
## 16
You then—just as you were being born, you became the rival to the  seven unrivaled ones, Indra.
You discovered heaven and earth, which were hidden. You provided joy  to the wide-ranging creatures.

## 17
You then—emboldened, you smote the power without counterpart with  your mace, mace-bearer.
You brought low (the power) of Śuṣṇa with your murderous weapons.  You found the cows just with your skill, Indra.
## 18
You then—bull of the settled domains, you became the forceful bane of  obstacles.
You released the rivers, which had been blocked. You conquered the
waters whose husband was a Dāsa.
## 19
“He is the very resolute one, who is the enjoyer of the pressings, to  whom the battle-fury has been conceded, who is like a rich man
through (all) the days,
who all alone is the performer of manly labors.” “That’s the
Vr̥tra-smiter!” they respond to the other.
## 20
That’s the Vr̥tra-smiter—Indra, sustainer of the settled domains. Him  who is to be invoked would we invoke with a lovely praise hymn.
He is our bounteous helper, our advocate. He is the giver of the prize  deserving of fame.
## 21
That’s the Vr̥tra-smiter—Indra, the master of the R̥bhus. As soon as he  was born, he became one to be invoked.
Performing many manly labors, like soma when drunk he is to be
invoked by his comrades.