+++
title = "097"

+++
97 (706) Indra
Rebha Kāśyapa
15 verses:  br̥hatī 1–9, atijagatī 10, upariṣṭādbr̥hatī 11–12, atijagatī 13, triṣṭubh 14,  jagatī 15, arranged in trcas ̥
Though metrically complex and metrically disturbed, this hymn follows a famil iar thematic pattern, with its contents structured by the tr̥ca division. In the first  tr̥ca (vss. 1–3) the poet asks Indra to take possession of wealth belonging to other  human lords, who do not follow proper ritual behavior, and to redistribute it to the  ritualists of the poet’s own group. The next tr̥ca (vss. 4–6), as often, calls on Indra to  come to the sacrifice from wherever he happens to be. The hope for Indra’s exclusive  company and the fear that he might not come at all are balanced in the third tr̥ca  (vss. 7–9). This tr̥ca has an unusual structure, with the first and last pādas of each  verse identical, a type of very tight ring-composition.
Only in the following tr̥ca (vss. 10–12) does the poet turn to formal praise of the  god (though vs. 9 serves as a transition), but these verses function almost as much  as a praise of the praisers themselves. In verse 11 the mockingly designated “raspers”  (rebhá), that is, the singers, especially the poet himself, whom the Anukramaṇī iden
tifies as Rebha, make Indra strong through their praise. More strikingly, in verse  12 the poets “bend the felly” of his chariot just by looking at it, and make Indra himself bow by their words; the point is surely that they thereby make Indra change  the course of his journey and come to the sacrifice. In verse 10 an unidentified  group both fashions and begets Indra; given the agents of the following verses, it  is very tempting to assume that Rebha intends us to understand that it is the poets  who fashioned and begot Indra (although the gods themselves, mentioned at the  end of the previous verse, could also be the subject). In the last tr̥ca the poet com
bines praise of Indra’s immense power with pleas for him to use it for our benefit.
## 1
The delights that you, the possessor of the sun, brought here from the  (other) lords, o Indra,
from that strengthen only your praiser, bounteous one, and those who  have twisted the ritual grass for you.
## 2
What you have appropriated, Indra—the horse, the cow, and the ovine  portion—
confer that on the one who sacrifices, presses, and offers priestly gifts— not on the niggard.
## 3
He who slumbers sleepily not following the commandments, not  following the gods, o Indra,
through his own activities he will hinder his wealth from prospering.  Put him far away from it.
## 4
Whether, able one, you are in the distance, whether nearby, Vr̥tra-smiter, from there he who has pressed soma seeks to attract you, Indra, with  hymns as hairy-maned (horses) on heaven’s way.
## 5
Or whether you are in the luminous realm of heaven or on the surface  of the sea,
whether in an earthly seat, best smiter of Vr̥tra, whether in the
midspace—come here!
## 6
When our soma drinks are pressed, o soma-drinker, lord of power, bring yourself to exhilaration—with your liberal generosity, Indra, with  wealth in profusion.
## 7
Don’t shun us, Indra. Become our feasting companion.
You—be there with help for us; just you—be friendship for us. Don’t  shun us, Indra.
## 8
Among us, Indra, at our pressing, sit down to drink the honey.
Produce great help for the singer, bounteous one—among us, Indra, at  our pressing.
## 9
The gods have not attained you, nor mortals, o possessor of the stone. You dominate all created things with your vast power. The gods have  not attained you.
## 10
The superior man who is even more dominant over all battles—Indra  have they jointly fashioned and begotten for ruling—
most excellent in resolve and a hindrance in obstructing, strong,
strongest, powerful, surpassing.1204 VIII.98
## 11
The “raspers” have cried out in unison to him, to Indra to drink of  the soma,
so as to increase him, the lord of the sun. For he of steadfast
commandments is united with strength and with help.
## 12
The inspired poets bend the felly just with their gaze and bow the ram  [=Indra] with their cry.
Very bright, without deceit, along with your versifiers they (cry out)
close to the ear of the surpassing one.
## 13
I constantly call on this Indra, bounteous, strong, unrepulsable,
deploying his own powers in every way.
If the most munificent one, worthy of the sacrifice, will turn here
because of our hymns, let the mace-bearer make all our pathways
easy for wealth.
## 14
You, o Indra, perceive how to utterly destroy the strongholds with your  strength, most powerful, able one.
In fear of you, mace-bearer, do all the worlds and both heaven and
earth tremble.
## 15
Indra, brilliant champion, let this truth be protective for me. Carry us  across manifold difficulties, as if across the waters.
When, King Indra, would you show us the favor of wealth, to be
eagerly sought like the distillate of all mother’s milk?