+++
title = "098"

+++
98 (707)
Indra
Nr̥medha  Āngirasa ̇
12 verses: uṣṇih, except kakubh 7, 10–11, puraüṣṇih 9, 12, arranged in trcas. ̥
Although the hymn is composed in three different meters, each of the three meters  consists of two pādas of eight syllables and one of twelve, just differently arranged,  so that the hymn is more formally unified than the bare metrical synopsis suggests.  It is arranged in tr̥cas, but not all the tr̥cas show unity of form or content. The  second tr̥ca (vss. 4–6) has a four-syllable refrain, and each verse of the last (vss.  10–12) begins with a form of “you” and contains the vocative “you of a hundred  resolves,” though not always in the same position. Otherwise there are no clear  formal marks.
The hymn begins (vs. 1) with an exhortation to the ritualists to sing to Indra, and  the second tr̥ca begins (vs. 4) with a complementary request to Indra to come to the  sacrifice, but most of the rest of the first six verses is devoted to generalized praise  of Indra. In the third tr̥ca (vss. 7–9) the ritualists mobilize their verbal resources to  strengthen Indra and bring him to the sacrifice, and in the last tr̥ca (vss. 10–12), as  usual, the poet then states our requests, here for battle strength and fighting heroes  rather than wealth. 1. To Indra sing a sāman, a lofty one to the lofty inspired poet,
to the creator of the foundations, who is attentive to poetic inspiration,  inviting admiration.
## 02
You, Indra, are the dominator; you caused the sun to shine.
Accomplishing all deeds, controlling all the gods, you are great.
## 03
Flashing forth (like) the sun with its light, you went to the luminous  realm of heaven.
The gods yielded themselves to partnership with you, Indra.
## 04
Come here to us, Indra, as the dear, entirely victorious one, who cannot  be concealed,
broad on all sides like a mountain—as lord of heaven.
## 05
For, you real drinker of soma, you dominate both world-halves.
Indra, you are the strengthener of the soma-presser—as lord of heaven. 6. For you, Indra, are the splitter of each and every stronghold,
the smiter of the Dasyu, the strengthener of Manu—as lord of heaven.
## 07
For therefore, o Indra who yearns for hymns, we have sent our great  desires surging to you
as those who come with waters [=Maruts] do their waters.
## 08
Like water with its floods, our sacred formulations are strengthening  you, o champion,
even though you have already grown strong day by day, o possessor of  the stone.
## 09
With a song they yoke the two fallow bays of the vigorous one to the  broad chariot with its broad yoke,
the two conveyors of Indra, yoked by speech.
## 10
Indra, bring here to us strength and manly power, you unbounded one  of a hundred resolves,
bring here a hero victorious in battle.
## 11
For you are our father, o good one of a hundred resolves, you our mother. And therefore we beg for your favor.
## 12
To you who seek the prize do I appeal, you tempestuous much-invoked  one of a hundred resolves.
Grant us a mass of good heroes.