+++
title = "099"

+++
99 (708)
Indra
Nr̥medha  Āṅgirasa
8 verses: br̥hatī alternating with satobr̥hatī, arranged in pragāthas
As often, an invitation to the soma sacrifice begins the hymn (vss. 1–2), but it then  continues directly to the topic of Indra’s giving (vss. 3–4), which often ends hymns.  The poet expresses his hope for goods somewhat indirectly, in a curious simile about

getting cooked in the sun (vs. 3) and in the complex negative constructions of verse  4. The references to the same time yesterday (vs. 1) and to the apparent rebirth, that  is, the regular rising, of the sun (vs. 3) suggest that the setting is the dawn ritual,  when priestly gifts are distributed.
The second half of the hymn (vss. 4–8) is the praise hymn proper, with emphasis  on Indra’s irresistible might in battle. The changes rung on the root tr̥̄ “overcome”  as well as the balanced oppositions (of the type “who X-es but is not X-ed”) and  parallelisms (e.g., the recurrence of -tar- agent nouns) give this portion of the hymn  a high rhetorical polish.
## 1
At this time yesterday these fervent men made you drink,
o mace-bearer.
Listen here to those whose vehicle is the praise song, Indra; come right  up to the good pasture.
## 2
Become exhilarated, you well-lipped possessor of the fallow bays: we  beseech you for this. The ritual adepts attend to you.
Yours are the utmost claims to fame deserving of hymns at our pressings,  o Indra who yearn for song.
## 3
As those who “get cooked” [=become warm/fervent] share in the sun,  they share in all (the goods) of Indra.
When he [=the Sun?] who has been born before is being born (again) with  strength, we direct our thoughts toward goods, as if toward our share.
## 4
Praise the giver of goods, whose presents are not harmful. The presents  of Indra are beneficial.
He does not take umbrage at the desire of a man who does honor, as he  bestirs his mind for giving.
## 5
O Indra, at the battle-charges you dominate all contenders.
You are the smiter of maledictions, the begetter, the all-overcomer.
Overcome those who seek to overcome.
## 6
The two “opponents” [=Heaven and Earth] follow after your gusting in  its headlong rush, like two parents after their child.
All contenders go slack before your battle fury, when you overcome
Vr̥tra, Indra.
## 7
For you (people) (we invoke) the one with enduring help, the unaging  driver who cannot be driven,
the swift victor, impeller, best of charioteers, the strengthener of the
Tugryas who cannot be overcome—
## 8
The one who sets right but needs no setting right, made by might, of a  hundred forms of help and a hundred resolves,
common (to all)—Indra do we invoke for help, the possessor of goods,  speeder of goods.