+++
title = "101"

+++
101 (710)
Various Gods: Mitra and Varuṇa (1–5c), Ādityas  (5d-6), Aśvins (7–8), Vāyu (9–10), Sūrya (11–12), Uṣas (or Praise of  the Sun’s Radiance) (13), Pavamāna (14), Cow (15–16)
Jamadagni Bhārgava
16 verses: br̥hatī 1, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13; satobr̥hatī 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12; gāyatrī 3; triṣṭubh 14–16,  arranged (for the most part) in pragāthas.
As the above summary of the deities and the meters demonstrates, this hymn is  structurally quite complex, and indeed it may consist of several original hymns.  (See Oldenberg 1888: 218 n. 1.) The divisions we see are somewhat at variance with  the Anukramaṇī’s analysis. The first six verses appear to belong together, with two  pragāthas (vss. 1–4) to Mitra and Varuṇa and a third (vss. 5–6) expanding to include  the Ādityas in general, the three best known (Mitra, Varuṇa, and Aryaman) named  and the rest subsumed under the title “kings.” The focus is on the gods’ journey to  the sacrifice and the praise presented to them there, save for the second pragātha  (vss. 3–4), which gives a notable description of Mitra and Varuṇa’s missile and the  threat it poses.
There follow a pragātha to the Aśvins (vss. 7–8) and one to Vāyu (vss. 9–10),  focused even more strongly on their journeys to the sacrifice. The following pragātha  to the Sun (vss. 11–12) contains some of the most flat-footed verses in the R̥gveda;  it is hard to tell whether the poet’s inspiration gave out, or if there is some deeper  purpose that escapes the modern reader.
In our opinion the praise of divinities stops here, and the remainder of the hymn  (vss. 13–16) depicts the ritual moment. In verse 13 an oblation of butter or some  other milk product is poured into the fire by the priests; verse 14 (the most difficult  verse in the hymn) appears to concern the offering of soma. The final two verses  (15–16) exalt the cow, who appeared briefly in verse 13, in the most extravagant  terms, as kin to major groups of gods, source of immortality, and a goddess asso
ciated with speech. This association (vs. 16) reminds us of the somewhat intrusive  presence of the goddess Speech as a milk-cow at the end of the immediately preced ing hymn (VIII.100.10–11).
## 01
That mortal has labored just so for the conclave of the gods, each one  by one,
who has now brought Mitra and Varuṇa here for their preeminence, for  our giving of oblations.
## 02
The two possessing highest dominion and broad vision, superior men,  kings of longest fame,
with their wondrous skill as if with their arm-strength they drive their  chariot, together with the rays [/reins] of the sun.
## 03
Who ran forth as your quick messenger, o Mitra and Varuṇa,
copper-headed, hasty in his exuberance,

## 04
Who does not come to rest to negotiate, nor to be called back, nor to  come to agreement—
from collision with that one deliver us today, deliver us with your  two arms.
## 05
(Sing) forth for Mitra, forth for Aryaman, o you rich in truth, a speech, a companionable, pleasurable, protective praise song—sing to  Varuṇa, to the kings.
## 06
They rouse their own ruddy, noble treasure, the single son of the three  (mothers) [=Agni].
They, undeceivable, watch over the immortal foundations for mortals.
## 07
(Drive) here to my upraised speeches, the most brilliant ones that are to  be performed—
drive, Nāsatyas, both of one accord, to make tracks toward the
oblations.
## 08
When we call to you for your giving without animus, you two rich in  prize mares,
come, advancing the advancing ritual offering, you superior men, as  you are sung by Jamadagni.
## 09
Drive here to our sacrifice that touches heaven, Vāyu, with the  well-disposed (gods).
(The one soma drink) within the sieve above is being mixed; this pure  (soma) here has been held out to you.
## 10
The Adhvaryu pursues (you) along the straightest paths, (for you) to  receive the oblations.
Then, teamster, drink of both of ours—the pure soma and the one  mixed with milk.
## 11
Yes indeed! you are great, Sūrya; yes indeed! Āditya, you are great. The greatness of you who are great attracts admiration. Certainly, god,  you are great.
## 12
Yes indeed! Sūrya, you are great in fame; in every way, god, you  are great.
Because of his greatness the lordly one was set in front for the gods, as  the extensive undeceivable light.
## 13
Here is the one [=butter offering] who is heading downward,  accompanied by chants, her form created by a ruddy (cow).
Like brilliant (Dawn) she has appeared opposite, coming hither within  the ten arms.
## 14
Three offspring [=soma-drinks/pressings] have made their traversal (of  the filter); the others have settled down around the chant.
Loftily he has stood among the creatures; the self-purifying (soma) has  entered within the golden (flames). 15. Mother of the Rudras, daughter of the Vasus, sister of the Ādityas,  navel of immortality—
I now proclaim to observant people: do not smite the blameless
cow—Aditi.
## 16
Knowing speech, rousing speech, reverently approaching with all  visionary thoughts,
the goddess, coming hither from the gods, the cow—*let not a
small-witted mortal appropriate me.
The final group of hymns consists of 102–103, dedicated to Agni.