+++
title = "102"

+++
102 (711)
Agni
Prayoga Bhārgava or Agni Pāvaka Bārhaspatya or Agni Grhapati Sahasa ̥ ḥ Sūnu and  Agni Yaviṣṭha Sahasaḥ Sūnu (together or one or the other)
22 verses: gāyatrī, arranged in trcas ̥
For most of its length, this hymn is a conventional treatment of Agni’s ritual  activities, but with particular stress on his role as kaví “poet” or “sage poet”  (vss. 1, 5, 17, 18). In general there is little internal unity in the tr̥cas, and indeed  the third tr̥ca (vss. 7–9) is particularly disjointed, making a false start with two  unconnected sentence fragments (vs. 7), followed by a purpose clause with no  main clause (vs. 8). However, the second tr̥ca (vss. 4–6) has a refrain, and a curi
ous one at that:  “Agni, whose garment is the sea.” This description probably  references several different Agni themes: his identification and ultimate merging  with Apām Napāt “Child of the Waters” (see esp. II.35); the myth about Agni’s  flight from his ritual duties, in which he hides in the waters; and the sprinkling  of the fire with consecrated water in the Agnihotra, a ritual action also referred  to in verse 14, where the associated act of laying ritual grass around the fire is  also mentioned. Verse 14 may also recall Agni’s flight and his concealment in the  waters.
The conventional hymn appears to end with the sixth tr̥ca (vss. 16–18), solemnly  treating the generation and installation of Agni as the conveyor of both the gods  and the oblations. The next tr̥ca (vss. 19–21) has a light and self-deprecating tone.  The poet claims to have neither of the barebones requisites for even a simple offer
ing to Agni, a cow for the oblation and wood to feed his flames (vs. 19). All he has  is “something like this”—namely the hymn he has just produced. This is clearly  false modesty, and indeed the poet treats the standard wood and ghee rather slight ingly in the next two verses (20–21). In the final appended verse (22, not part of a  tr̥ca), he proudly pronounces that a man should kindle Agni with his mind and his  vision (not, the implication is, with mere wood and ghee), and indeed that he has  just done so.1214 VIII.102
## 1
You, Agni, establish lofty vitality for your pious server, god, as sage poet, houselord, youth.
## 2
Along with the one [=offering ladle] who reverently invokes the gods,  who offers friendship to them, o far-radiant Agni,
as observant one, convey them here to us.
## 3
With you as best inciting yokemate, o youngest one,
we become dominant to win the prize.
## 4
Like Aurva and Bhr̥gu, like Apnavāna, I call upon the gleaming one, upon Agni, whose garment is the sea.
## 5
I call upon the sage poet, whose rush is the wind’s, upon his might,  whose roar is thunder’s,
upon Agni, whose garment is the sea.
## 6
As if upon the stimulus of Savitar, upon the benefit of Bhaga,  I call upon
Agni, whose garment is the sea.
## 7
Toward Agni, the strengthening one, best of many for your  ceremonies...
for the mighty child (of might)...
## 8
So that this (Agni) here will be at hand for us, as Tvaṣṭar is at hand for  the forms to be crafted,
with his will—the will of this glorious one ...
## 9
This Agni here is master over all the splendors among the gods. He will come near to us here with prizes.
## 10
Praise here the most glorious of all Hotars,
Agni, foremost at the sacrifices,
## 11
Sharp, pure-flamed, who shines preeminent in the houses,
of longest fame.
## 12
Sing him, o poet, like a winning steed, the tempestuous one, who arranges the peoples in their places, like Mitra.
## 13
Those akin [=waters?], constantly directing to you the hymns of him  who prepares the oblation,
have approached you in front of Vāyu.
## 14
Whose ritual grass still stands uncut, not yet triply bundled— even his footprint you waters have deposited.
## 15
The footprint of the generous god, with his unassailable forms of help, is an auspicious sight, like the sun.
## 16
O god Agni, heating up with your flame through visions of ghee, convey the gods hither and sacrifice to them.
## 17
The mothers, the gods begot you, the sage poet, o Aṅgiras,
as immortal conveyor of the oblation. 18. You, o sage Agni, a discerning messenger worthy to be chosen,
have they installed as conveyor of the oblation.
## 19
Because I have no cow, nor an axe in a wooden (tree),
I therefore bring just a thing like this to you.
## 20
When, Agni, we set any pieces of wood whatsoever in you,
enjoy them, youngest one.
## 21
What the little termite eats, what the ant creeps over,
let all that be ghee for you.
## 22
Kindling Agni with his mind, the mortal should follow his visionary  thought.
I have kindled Agni with the dawning lights.