+++
title = "103"

+++
103 (712)
Agni (1–13), Agni and the Maruts (14)
Sobhari Kāṇva
14 verses: br̥hatī 1–4, 6; virāḍrūpā 5; satobr̥hatī 7, 9, 11, 13; kakubh 8, 12; gāyatrī 10;  anuṣṭubh 14. One trca (1–3), 5 prag ̥ āthas (4–13), final verse (14).
Another metrically complex hymn, consisting mostly of pragāthas in various com binations of meters, but beginning with a tr̥ca (vss. 1–3) and ending with a single  verse (14). Proferes (2007: 38–40) argues that the opening tr̥ca concerns the forg ing of a unified power from multiple clans by commitment to their mutually wor shiped fire, which is identified as belonging to Divodāsa, the great Bharata leader  (vs. 2). The territorial expansion and the overcoming of other populations therein  are treated in verses 2–3.
Though the pragātha that follows (vss. 4–5) does not explicitly continue the  theme of victory through centralized leadership, it does promise rewards to the  man who devotes himself to Agni—particularly the renowned “imperishable fame”  (ákṣiti śrávaḥ, vs. 5), a phrase whose Indo-European antiquity has been known  and discussed for a century and a half. And “heroic glory” (vīrávad yáśaḥ, vs. 9), as  well as goods and protection, are the rewards for service to Agni in the following  pragāthas (vss. 6–11). The final pragātha (vss. 12–13) seeks to avert Agni’s anger.  In the summary verse (14) the poet names himself and invites Agni to the sacrifice.
## 01
He has just appeared, the best pathfinder, in whom they have established  the commandments.
Right up to him just born, the increaser of the Ārya, to Agni have our  hymns reached.
## 02
The Fire allied to Divodāsa (has gone) forth, as if (all the way) to the  gods with his might.
He has unrolled himself along Mother Earth; he has taken his stand on  the back of the firmament.

## 03
Before whom the communities tremble, as he performs (deeds) to be  constantly acclaimed,
the one who by himself wins thousands as if at the winning of
wisdom—serve Agni with insightful thoughts.
## 04
The mortal whom you wish to lead forward for wealth, who does pious  service for you, good one,
he acquires a hero who proclaims solemn speech, who fosters a
thousand by himself, o Agni.
## 05
With a steed he bores through to the prize even in the stronghold; he  acquires imperishable fame.
In you among the gods might we always acquire all things of value, o  you of many goods.
## 06
He who distributes all goods, the gladdening Hotar of the peoples— like the cups of honey that go first to him, the praises go forth to Agni. 7. Those of good gifts, seeking the gods, groom (you), the charioteer (of  the ceremonies), like a horse, with hymns.
Deliver both our progeny and our posterity (to safety), o wondrous  clanlord; deliver (to us) the generosity of the bounteous ones.
## 08
Sing forth to the most munificent one, to truthful, lofty, pure-flamed Agni, o Upastutas.
## 09
The bounteous one will gain heroic glory (for us)—he who is brilliant  when kindled and bepoured.
Surely his benevolence will come here to us anew along with prizes?
## 10
O Āsāva, praise the dearest of the dear ones, the guest,
Agni, the controller of chariots,
## 11
The one deserving the sacrifice who at sunrise, as finder of tied-down  goods, will turn them hither,
whose waves [=flames] are difficult to cross, like the waves in a torrent,  when he seeks to win the prize with his insightful thought.
## 12
Let the guest not be angry at us, this good Agni, proclaimed by many, who is the good Hotar of good ceremony.
## 13
And let those not suffer harm who (approach you) with invitations here  in sundry ways, o good Agni.
For even a weakling reverently invokes you for a mission if he is a man  of good ceremony who has bestowed the oblation.
## 14
O Agni, drive here, as comrade of the Maruts, along with the Rudras,  for soma-drinking.
(Drive) to the good praise of Sobhari. Make yourself euphoric in the  presence of Svarṇara.Volume III