+++
title = "04"

+++
The polarized positive/negative treatment of Rodasī continues in the first half of this vs., in my interpr. With Hoffmann (/WG) I take pāda a as separate from b and supply a verb of motion with párā ‘away’. In b, in my interpr. only, the fem.

instr. sādhāraṇyā́‘common’ refers both to the fact that Rodasī is held by them in common and that this type of relationship leaves her open to the charge that she is no better than a whore. (As noted in the publ. intro., even Draupadī in the Mahābhārata sometimes receives this insult because she is the common wife of all the Pāṇḍavas.) The 2nd hemistich puns on the name Rodasī (once again, this is only my interpr; others see it very differently), providing us with a grammatical problem. The form found in the text, rodasī́, should by accent be the name of the Maruts’ consort, but as a singular -ī-stem, it should be nominative, a grammatical identity that does not fit the context well. Old takes it as an instr. Ge suggests that the word here is flexionslos, which conveniently allows him to construe it as an acc. with ápa nudanta (so also Re, without comment on the morphology). Hoffmann (fld. by WG) suggests it’s an elliptical dual, standing for Rodasī and Vāc. I instead think it is a grammatical compromise that enables a pun -- a compromise between dual *ródasī, the standard word for the two world halves (so accented) and sg. *rodasī́m, the acc. sg. of the personal name. In other words, the rodasī́we have in the text is a formal compromise: the right form for the dual worlds but the wrong accent; the right accent for the singular woman but the wrong case form. This is where the pun comes in, depending on a further implied pun on the ná that opens the line. On the one hand it is the negative, to be read with the personal name: “did not push Rodasī away” (so most tr.); on the other hand it is the simile marker, to be read with the two worlds: “as they did push apart the two world halves.” This refers to the cosmogonic deed, generally attributed to Indra, of separating the two world halves to create living space between them. The ná is of course in the wrong position for the simile marker, but I think Agastya relies on his audience to actualize his plays on words with hints like this. The full version of this very condensed expression would be ná *rodasī́(m) [/ródasī] ná “not Rodasī like the two world halves.

In the next pāda both Rodasī and the two world halves are then the objects of a (quasi-)infinitival vṛ́dham (again, my interpr. differs from others’). Cf. the similar expression in I.85.1c ródasī hí marútaś cakriré vr̥dhé “the Maruts made the two world halves grow strong,” with a clear dative infinitive in periphrastic causative usage. The only other ex. of acc. vṛ́dham in III.16.2 also has infinitival value and even has the Maruts as subj.

