+++
title = "05"

+++
This vs. depicts a svayaṃvara (self-choice) marriage likened to the mythological prototype of the svayaṃvara, that of Sūryā. The identification of the two female figures is underlined by the echo between asurí yā ‘her ladyship’ (pāda, referring to Rodasī) and ā́sūr i yā (opening pāda c, naming Sūryā).

jóṣat is an aor. subjunctive. As the first word of the verse, it introduces the “choice” theme. I take jóṣad yád as a type of politeness formula “if X will be pleased to …,” archaic English “an it please …” Note that dat. sacádhyai ‘to accompany’ is complementary to dat. sakhyā́ya ‘for companionship’ in 4d and of course etymologically related. The complementarity extends to the implied subjects: in 4d the Maruts are taking steps to produce companionship; in 5a it is Rodasī who decides to accompany them.

The bahuvrīhi nṛmáṇas- usually means ‘manly minded’ and so it is interpr.

here by most (Ge [/Hoffmann/WG] ‘mannhaftgesinnt’; Re ‘l’âme virile’). But though she does display a fair amount of gumption, I find this an odd characterization of the very feminine Rodasī. In this context I take it rather as ‘having her mind on (the) men’ (that is, the Maruts, who are regularly called nṛ́-). See vṛ́ṣamaṇas- in 7c.

Pāda c presents the crucial moment in the RV svayaṃvara, the bride’s mounting the chariot of the groom (see Jamison 2001, Fs. Parpola). On a possible preterital tr. of ā́… gāt see comm. on the next vs. ### 06
The decisive moment of mounting is repeated immediately in this verse, in the causative ā́sthāpayanta. The -anta form can be simply an -anta replacement of act. -an of the usual type (Jamison 1979), but it might also be semantically justified: “They cause(d) her to mount (their own chariot).” As Hoffmann points out, ā́sthāpayanta need not be read as impf. ā́ asthāpayanta with the Pp., but can be an injunctive ā́sthāpayanta. The publ. tr. has preterital “caused … to mount.,” and I still think that is correct, though a general present could provide an easy transition to the here-and-now of the ritual found in cd.

My reason for preferring the preterital reading has to do with my view of the structure of the middle section of the hymn: vss. 3-6ab treat the mythological relationship between Rodasī and the Maruts, while 6cd-7 bring Rodasī and the Maruts into the ritual present. I see vidátheṣu in 6b as the pivot: on the one hand it echoes vidathyā̀in 3d and provides ring-compositional closure to the mythological section of the hymn; on the other hand it looks forward to the ritual present 6cd.

Since the chariot mounting of 6a is part of the mythological past, a preterital (or timeless) tr. fits it better. (It might also be better to tr. the injunc. ā́… gāt in 5c in the same preterital fashion.) In the publ. tr. I take śubhé with the preceding pāda: “mount for beauty,” since śúbh- is very commonly used in Marut hymns to refer to their journey (cf., e.g.,

