+++
title = "06"

+++
áriṣṭagrāmāḥ is a bahuvrīhi, but the tr. ‘having an invulnerable band’ seemed too heavy.

On krívis- see comm. to I.30.1, where I suggest a relationship with kravís- ‘raw, bloody flesh’ as a re-formed -i-stem to the underlying root krū < *kruH. A number of other interpr. have been made.

I supply “(a path)” as obj. of rádati because words for ‘path, way’ are frequently obj. of this verb (e.g., VII.87.1 rádat patháḥ; also II.30.2, V.10.1, V.80.3, VI.30.3, VII.47.4, VII.60.4, X.75.2).

In my reading the structure of pāda d is quite complex and intricate and differs from the standard. Both Ge and Re supply ‘waters’ as the obj. of riṇā́ti in the frame (see also Old), since waters are several times elsewhere the obj. of √rī. (WG take paśváḥ as obj. of both simile and frame.) I prefer to find the object nearer at hand, namely trees, based on vánaspati(ḥ) in the previous vs. (5c). In another passage trees liquefy at the Maruts’ assault: V.58.6 … riṇaté vánāni, and a transitive version of this phrase is found with Agni as subj. at V.41.10 ní riṇāti vánā (cf. I.127.4).

As for the simile, Ge takes barháṇā as fem. nom. sg. with súdhitā (“wie der beharrliche Eifer …”), but barháṇā, which is fairly well attested, is otherwise only an instr. sg. used adverbially (so rendered by both Re and WG). Like Re and WG I take didyút (fem.) of c as the referent of súdhitā ‘well-placed’, but didyút- in a slightly different sense: not as a thrown missile but as a sharp-pointed thing used as a goad. The verb riṇā́ti is held constant between simile and frame, but again it has different senses in the two structures: in the simile it does not mean ‘liquefy, dissolve, i.e., destroy’, but ‘make to flow, i.e., to cause to move’, a more appropriate meaning with paśváḥ ‘livestock’ as object.

