+++
title = "09"

+++
Ge and Re make taviṣā́ṇi part of the frame, not the simile. This actually does not alter the sense very much, since they still read mithaspṛ́dhyā with taviṣā́ṇi in an “as if” construction. Given the structure of the hemistich and the need for something for mithaspṛ́dhyā to modify, I prefer to take it with the simile. My only reservation about putting taviṣā́ṇi in the simile is that the Maruts’ taviṣā́ṇi are mentioned in 1d.

More crucial is the grammatical identity and function of mithaspṛ́dhyā (so Pp.). Old follows BR in taking this not as a gerundive but as a gerund, but, strikingly, neither suggests a tr. for it. Since a simile consisting of a gerund would be highly unusual (unprecedented, I think, though I haven’t checked the entire RV), a neut. pl.

gerundive agreeing with taviṣā́ṇi makes more grammatical sense. But what meaning is being conveyed? I think the point is that there are so many good things on the chariot that one can’t single out just one: like opposing forces (taviṣā́ṇi) they contend with each other as rivals to be the best and most desirable. The sentiment is similar to VII.26.4 mithastúra ūtáyo yásya pūrvī́ḥ “whose many forms of help compete for the lead,” meaning that they are all eager to be the most helpful.

The loc. sg. prápatheṣu is taken by all standard tr. as “on (your) journeys” (vel sim.), agreeing with the endpoint of Gr’s def. ‘in die Ferne führender Weg, Reise in die Ferne, Reise’, which seems to me to follow a slippery path indeed. I interpr. the stem prápatha- (4x) rather as lit. ‘the path forward’, but figuratively as ‘vanguard’. The -in-stem superlative prapathíntama-, found nearby at I.173.7, then means ‘most in the vanguard’ (/’most forward on the path’), used of Indra there and VI.31.5 (the 3rd occurrence, at VIII.1.30, is a PN). Although the difference between ‘journey’ and ‘vanguard’ is not crucial in our passage here, the two non-PN occurrences of prapathíntama- both refer to Indra, with I.173.7 specifically to Indra as warrior, and ‘most in the vanguard’ works much better than Re’s “toi qui (vas) les grands chemins par excellence” or WG’s “der am meisten auf dem Weg bist.” Ge’s “der am meisten auf der Kriegsfahrt” seems to recognize this. For prápatheṣu here I’d be inclined to emend my publ. tr. to “on the paths forward,” because of the plural.

What is going on in d depends on the interpr. of samáyā, for which see comm. ad I.113.10. Most take it to mean ‘in the middle’ vel sim.; this certainly produces an acceptable image, since the axle is between the two wheels. But as discussed ad I.113.10, the totality of passages containing samáyā suggest a meaning ‘altogether, all at once, at the same time’, and in all these passages it contrasts with a form of ví (as here). The image I see here is somewhat more complex than the standard one, namely that through the action of the axle the wheels, though separate, turn at the same time. This is close to the kind of paradox much loved by RVic poets. This interpr. requires medial vāvṛte to be transitive (rather than intransitive-reflexive, pace most tr. and also Kü 464), but the self-involved nature of the action (the axle is turning its own wheels, as it were) makes this unproblematic. Potentially more troubling is that by this interpr. cakrā́should be dual acc., and the stem cakrá- is neuter, whose dual should be (and several times is) cakré. However, in at least one passage, VIII.5.29, we have a clear masculine dual: ubhā́cakrā́hiraṇyáyā “both your wheels are golden” (note the ‘both’ ubhā́), which would match the form here.

Alternatively, we could take cakrā́as neut. plural, assuming four wheels -- and though this would technically require two axles, “the axle” as a mechanical marvel could stand for both. (Rather like saying “the internal-combustion engine powers most of the cars on the highway,” even though every car has its own.)

