+++
title = "14"

+++
The relations among the clauses in this vs. might be problematic, primarily because of an apparent gender mismatch: párīṇas- ‘abundance’, which in the instr.

párīṇasā goes with the rel. yéna in the rel. clause occupying ab, would be the most likely referent of both yád in the parallel rel. clause of c and tád in the main clause of d. And in fact that is how I (and the other standard tr.) take it. However, párīṇas- is said to be masculine and yád/tád are of course neuter -- an obstacle that Old for his part considers too large to be overcome. However, the noun is most likely neuter.

This is what we’d expect of a stem built with suffix -nas-, and the only diagnostic form for a masc. is acc. sg. párīṇasam in III.24.5. Otherwise the forms are singular obliques, esp. in the collocation rāyā́párīṇasā “with wealth in profusion” (4x), and hence ambiguous as to gender. The masc. acc. sg. is most probably a nonce form created to match its usual formulaic partner, masc. rayí-, in the phrase rayíṃ vīrávantam párīṇasam. See AiG II.2.738 and EWA s.v. Substantially the same argument is made by Lubotsky (“Avestan xv arǝnah-: The Etymology and Concept, 1998, 483).

abhī́ṣṭim in d is analyzed by the Pp. as abhí íṣṭim, as might be expected. Since (vanishingly rare) root-accented íṣṭi- is derived from √yaj and means ‘sacrifice’, the standard tr. exert a good deal of effort to introduce this sacrifice into their interpretation, somewhat embarassingly in a pāda that already contains ebhír yajñébhiḥ “with these sacrifices.” Cf. Re’s rather overblown “puissé-je l'obtenir grâce aux sacrifices que voici, pour (que vous soyez présents à mon) oblation” (the “l’” in “l’obtenir” is the párīṇas-). I take it rather to iṣṭí- ‘desire’, in a phrase abhí

*iṣtím “to my desire, to my liking’. Either the annealed sandhi form *abhī́ṣtíṃ lost its
2nd accent redactionally, or the accent retraction that was ultimately to affect all -tistems (see Lundquist, -ti-stems) was already spreading to this stem, producing the occasional íṣṭi- ‘desire’.

