+++
title = "02"

+++
Both tákvan- and bhū́rṇi- have received diverse tr., which I will not treat in detail here. For √tak as ‘plunge, rush’, etc., see EWA s.v. TAK; here and in takva-vī́- I take it to refer to a “swooping” bird of prey. As for bhū́rni, it belongs to √bhur ‘quiver’, and I tr. it here as ‘restless’ to capture the constant circling and diving of birds of prey. How then can he ‘cling’ (siṣakti) to the wood? The image must be of the flames of the fire constantly licking and dancing (to use our preferred metaphors in English), but always in contact with the wood. My “clings” is a more vivid version of the literal “accompanies, keeps company with.” To avoid the appearance of contradiction, the phrase might better have been rendered “ever restless, like a swooping (bird), he (yet) clings to the wood.” Note that the second syllable of vánā somewhat echoes the ná simile markers of previous pādas.

The simile of c is syntactically problematic, consisting of a neut. NA sg.

páyaḥ ‘milk’ and a fem. nom. sg. dhenúḥ ‘milk-cow’, with the relation between them unspecified. Ge simply takes it as a functional compound (“wie die Kuhmilch”), though unlike “life-breath” in 1c, the order of the elements would be wrong; Re takes dhenúḥ as if it were gen. (“comme le lait (de) la vache-laitière”), while Old (SBE) and WG render it as two similes (Old “like milk, like a milch-cow”). I have supplied a verb “(yielding),” allowing páyaḥ to serve as acc. object, on the basis of IV.57.2 dhenúr iva páyaḥ ... dhukṣva. None of these solutions is immediately satisfying. One clue might be whether the adjectives in d (śúcir vibhā́vā ‘blazing/gleaming and ‘farradiant’) are applicable to either the one or the other of the nouns in the simile, but this doesn’t turn out to be very helpful. Although both adjectives are regularly used of Agni, they are characteristic of neither milk nor cows. One exception is V.1.3 śúcir aṅkte śúcibhir góbhir agníḥ “blazing Agni is anointed with blazing cows,” but there the “cows” stand for products of the cow, either milk (so the publ. tr.) or, more likely, ghee, so that a metaphorical application to either noun is possible. And it may be that the simile in c is to be taken by itself, detached from the adjectives in d; see, e.g., 3cd, where the two pādas, one a simile, the other not, are semantically independent.

