+++
title = "09"

+++
As indicated in the publ. intro., I consider the last two verses of the hymn to reflect the ritual situation. This scenario is supported by the presence of 1st and 2nd pronouns (vayám and vaḥ respectively), with the 2nd ps. enclitic indicating, as often, the other human participants and observers besides the poet and priests, who are the “we.” The crux in this verse is carā́thā. The first problem with it is the long ā in the 2nd syllable, the only instance of such a stem in the transmitted RV beside regularly formed carátha- (13x). However, the situation is more complex: 4 of the transmitted carátha- forms occur in the Parāśara hymns (I.68.1, 70.3, 7, 72.6), but of these, 3 (68.1, 70.3, 7) would be metrically better if read *carā́tha-. I have no explanation for the variation and will not pursue the issue further. More interesting is the grammatical identity of the form and the semantic role it plays in the verse. Old (SBE, Noten) and Ge (/WG) take it as a nom. pl. ‘wanderers’, neuter if flg. the Pp., though Ge suggests that it might reflect masc. carā́thāḥ. They further interpret it as conjoined with vayám (Old, Ge) or identified with it (WG). However, in the Noten (ad loc., fn. 1) Old allows the possibility that the form could be an instr. parallel with vasatyā́(“mit Gehen und mit Verweilen”), an idea that Re develops, suggesting that the pair are semantically parallel to the contrastive pair yóga / kṣéma (roughly “activity and rest”). Re believes that the instrumentals characterize Agni (“(soit) dans (sa) marche, (soit) dans (sa) demeure”). This is possible, though it would be a slightly odd use of the instr. With Re I consider carā́thā an instr. contrasting with vasatyā́, but think that the pair is applicable to “us”: we approach Agni with homage with both our movable goods, that is, the livestock that provides the butter and milk offerings, and our household establishment that supplies the rest.

The 3rd pl. nákṣante (nákṣanta in sandhi) does not agree with its 1st pl. subject vayám. With Ge I take it as attraction to the immediately preceding simile, ástaṃ ná gā́vaḥ. It is accented because it begins the pāda.

