+++
title = "04"

+++
Striking is the abrupt change of subject of the 2nd sg. imperatives, from Indra (3c) to an unidentified human companion (4a).

My interpretation differs substantially from those of most others in pāda b. In my view, the accusative índram marks Indra as the one directly interrogated, rather than (with most interpretations) the one to be asked about. Most interpretors take vipaścítam as identifying the person to be interrogated (e.g., Ge. “einen Weisen”), thus assuming two different referents for the accusative singulars in that pāda: “ask the wise one about Indra.” I find that unlikely, in part because, though vipaścít- can be used of humans, it more often qualifies gods.

Taking Indra as the one interrogated has further effects on the interpretation.

For others the relative clause in c has Indra as its subject (yáḥ) and the 2nd ps. te refers to the human interrogator: it is Indra who is dear(er) to you, the poet, than your comrades. I, on the other hand, take pāda c as a syntactic hybrid, with an underlying direct discourse question, directed to Indra, “who [expected káḥ] is your choice from among your comrades?” incompletely converted into a relative clause in indirect discourse “ask (Indra) about (the one) who [yáḥ] is your [=Indra’s] choice…” In my view the 2nd ps. ‘your’ of “your choice” in pāda c refers to Indra, not to the subject of the imperatives párehi and pṛchā of ab, while Indra is in the 3rd ps in pāda b. (I will not even contemplate the possibility that pṛchā in b is a 1st ps subjunctive: “Go away.

I will ask / let me ask Indra…”) Although this interpretation complicates the syntax, in my opinion it fits better into its tṛca and better reflects the relationship between Indra and humans. As often in Indra contexts, the poet worries that Indra will favor others over the poet himself, and this verse poses the question directly to Indra: who do you like best? Indra’s presumed and desired answer is “you!” This answer then allows the poet to dismiss those who criticize him for not spreading his devotion around to other gods (vs. 5) and defends this exclusive focus as a good bargain, as the rest of the world has to admit (vs. 6). The first defense of henotheism? I should admit, however, that the standard view is somewhat compatible with my larger interpretation, in that “… ask about Indra, who is your [=poet’s] choice from among your comrades” could reinforce that message that our focus is only on Indra, not on other gods. But I do not see how questions about Indra fit with the next two verses.

I.4.5-6: Most interpretations take these two verses as syntactically parallel (e.g., Ge.

“Mögen … Und mögen …”), but the impv. bruvantu and the opt. vocéyuḥ are surely doing different things: the imperative is concessive: “let them say / even if they say ...” while the optative expresses the conclusion that the rest of the world would have to draw. The parallel utá’s that open these verses might give us pause, but they may have something like the value “on the one hand … on the other.”

