+++
title = "06"

+++
As indicated in the publ. intro., the standard clichéś of the soma maṇḍala gave way here to more novel material. The involvement of the Daughter of the Sun as purifier of soma is puzzling. Ge suggests (n. 6b) that the Daughter of the Sun, also found in this maṇḍala at IX.72.3, 113.3, is the “Dicht- oder Gesangeskunst,” on what seem to me slender grounds (mostly III.53.15, which is not at all clear). Oberlies’s notion (Relig. RV I.241, 282; II.60) that this locution indicates that Soma comes from heaven to earth at dawn is more plausible

-- though it should be kept in mind that Sūryā, the daughter of the Sun, is not the same as
Uṣas, Dawn. I would rather suggest that the presence of this figure in this vs., which immediately precedes two vss. metaphorically concerning ‘maidens’ (yóṣanaḥ) and ‘unwed girls’ (agrúvaḥ), is meant to showcase the mythological marriageable maiden par excellence: Sūryā exists essentially only to get married. Her appearance in this vs. serves as a positive model for the maidens that follow. However, this interpr. does not fit well with my interpr. of the other passages in which she appears in this maṇḍala; see esp. disc. ad IX.72.3.

The referent of te has occasioned some discussion. In this hymn the 2nd ps. referent is otherwise always soma, but the acc. sómam already appears in the vs. as obj. of punā́ti. The solution adopted by most (see Old’s disc.), which I also subscribe to, is that te does refer to soma, but to Soma the god, distinguishing him from soma the liquid, the ritual substance represented by the acc. sómam. Ge (n. 6) cites other possibilities that have been suggested -- the ritual patron or Indra -- though he himself accepts the Soma the god hypothesis.

