+++
title = "02"

+++
The hapax vṛ́ṣandhi- has been variously explained. Old rejects the reading as “sinnlos” and suggests an emendation to *tríṣandhi-, remarking that the vajra is so described in AV XI.10.3, 27. The influence of preceding vṛ́ṣā would account for the change. Hoffmann (MSS 8 [1956]: 15 = Aufs. II.395-96) instead suggests it is a haplology of vṛ́ṣa-saṃdhi- ‘mit starker Verbindung’, which in his view describes the binding of the head of the vajra, which he thinks was a hammer-like weapon, to the shaft. One of the unexamined assumptions of both Old’s and Hoffmann’s interpretations is that the weapon referred to here is the vajra and that this is identical to the stone (áśman-) in 1d. As I argue ad I.152.2 (see comm. thereon), there is no reason to assume here that the stone = vajra or that the unnamed weapon in 2a is identical to both. A form of vájra- is found in 3c, but it need not be the same as the weapon(s) referred to in 1d and 2a -- and in fact there is some reason to believe it is not, as the weapon here is being ‘hurled’ (ásyan), and to my knowledge the vajra is never thrown while stones regularly are (e.g., I.172.2). In my opinion the weapon in 2a is the stone of 1d and the qualifier vṛ́ṣandhi- is a formation like iṣu-dhí- ‘repository of arrows, quiver’, uda-dhí- ‘repository of water, spring, basin’, utsa-dhí- ‘fountainhead’ — hence ‘repository of bullish(ness)’. The difference in accent can be attributed to the influence of immediately preceding vṛ́ṣā. The combining form vṛ́ṣan-, rather than more common vṛ́ṣa-, is also found in vṛ́ṣaṇvant- and vṛ́ṣaṇ-vasu-.

The anomalous med. them. participle uṣámāna- ‘clothing oneself’, as if to an otherwise unattested 6th cl. pres. to √vas ‘wear’, belongs with the other unexpected med. participles (both them. and athem.) to √vaś ‘be eager’ and √vas ‘wear’ found in this Indra cycle. See disc. ad IV.16.14 and IV.19.4 and cf. uśāná- in the next hymn (IV.23.1).

The second hemistich is best interpreted in the context of V.52.9, a Marut hymn, where the Maruts páruṣṇyām, ū́rṇā vasata “clothe themselves in the wool [=foam] in the Paruṣṇī (River).” Note that in that passage páruṣṇyām and ū́rṇā are in different cases and numbers (fem. loc. sg. and fem. acc. pl. respectively) unlike here, where both are fem. acc. sg. Their grammatical difference in V.52.9, which imposes a semantic separation, makes it less likely here that páruṣṇīm is simply an adj.

modifying ū́rṇām, as Hoffmann (/WG) take it: “in shaggy wool” (KH: “in zottige (?) Wolle”; WG “in struppige Wolle”). Since páruṣṇī- is simply the fem. to paruṣá-, which is otherwise a color term (‘gray’), the introduction of ‘shaggy’ would also be puzzling. I therefore essentially follow Ge’s interpr. He takes páruṣṇīm … ū́rṇām as an unmarked simile: “in the Paruṣṇī (River) (like) wool”; I take it rather as a metaphor: “in the Paruṣṇī ‘wool’ [=foam].” The color gray enters this image in two ways. On the one hand, it’s quite possible that the Paruṣṇī River was so called because it appeared gray; on the other, river foam in general is gray-ish (and tufty, like wool), as google images of river foam show (unfortunately mostly of polluted rivers).

The unexpressed connection with the Maruts via the passage just cited is also expressed in pāda d through sakhyā́ya ‘for partnership’, where the partners must be the Maruts.

The word párvan- usually refers to a joint or segment; with Ge, I take it in this image to refer to tufts or articulated hunks of foam, like tufts of wool. With Ge I also think there’s a secondary word association between páruṣṇī- and párvan- (/ páru(ṣ)-).

