+++
title = "04"

+++
As just noted, polarized #dyaúr ... kṣā́ḥ# in b match the same (conceptual) pair in the same positions in 3d. Here in 4b the disjunction is emphasized by the fact that the two nominatives are subjects of a singular verb (rejata). The connection of the 3d and 4b is signaled by the fact that the same root provides the verb in both 3d and 4b: trans.-cause. rejayat and intrans. rejata respectively (both injunctives), and heaven and earth switch grammatical identity and function from object to subject.

Pāda a sits somewhat uncomfortably between these two complementary pādas.

The river banks and beds seem rather paltry natural features next to heaven and earth, which flank them. But they may serve a grammatical purpose: both NPs (víśvā ródhāṃsi [neut. pl.] and pravátaḥ … pūrvī́ḥ [fem. pl.]) are neutral as to case (nom. vs. acc.) and can thus serve as a pivot, available as both acc. objects for rejayat in 3d and nom. subjects for rejata in 4b. (Of course, although the neuter pl. could be the subject of a sg. verb, technically speaking a feminine pl. should not, but this does not seem a problem to me, as the neut. pl. leads the conjoined NP and would set the syntactic tone -- and they are pretty distant from the verb anyway.) Pāda c produces problems on several fronts. Who are the mother and father (mātárā)? (Old flatly announces he has no intention of trying to find out.) Why is the verb (bhárati) accented? Why are there two instances of ā́? What is the cow (góḥ) doing grammatically and/or conceptually? The only word that is not problematic (though see below) is śuṣmī́, which must refer to Indra, as in 1b. I do not have entirely satisfactory answers to the puzzles. Probably the default referent for mātárā would be Heaven and Earth, and they have figured prominently just previously. But there is the problem that Heaven and Earth are not particularly mobile, so how is it that Indra “brings them here”? As for the accent on bhárati, Ge suggests that pāda c is dependent on either ab or c, without overt subordination. Old (ZDMG 60 [1906]: 725-26 = KlSch 200-201) places it in the class of “priorischer Nebensatz” (to the main cl. in pāda d), but c doesn’t seem to provide sufficient grounding for d to justify the verbal accent.

Hoffmann (Injunk. 187 n. 147) cites Old’s own citation of himself (given above), but also what is the more likely explanation, given by Old in the same art. (708-12, esp.

711 = KlSch. 186): that it is implicitly antithetical, participating in two interlocked constructions, what Old (711 = 186) designates pavpα (that is, PREV [x-word] VERB PREV [corresponding x-́word]) -- with, in our passage, ā́as the PREV, mā́tárā … góḥ as x and x,́ and bhárati as accented VERB. In his exx. nothing intervenes between VERB and the repeated PREV, unlike śuṣmī́here, but I consider this a minor variant in the model. Perhaps more problematic is that mātárā and góḥ do not correspond grammatically, but again I would prefer to work with a more flexible model (and see below). In this model the accent on the verb and the doubled ā́fit under the same explanatory rubric, a desirable situation, all things being equal. (Such an explanation is blocked for Ge, who thinks the two ā́’s have different functions, the first preverb, the second preposition.) But what about the cow? One might note that there’s a similarly pāda-final góḥ in 8d as well as another quite baffling one in the next hymn, IV.23.6. I also wonder if this pile-up of pāda-final góḥ is not a sly reference to the impenetrable pāda-final góhe in the previous hymn (IV.21.6b, 7c, 8c), which caused so many interpretational difficulties there (though they are not etymologically related, at least by our current understanding of góhe). But this doesn’t help us at all with the meaning or the function of góḥ here. The first thing to consider is what case it is -- gen. or abl. Ge opts for the latter: Indra brings the two mothers from the cow (“von dem Rinde”), though in n. 4c he also entertains the possibility of an ellipsis of a nominative with a dependent genitive góḥ, “(son) of the cow,” namely the bull Indra.

As far as I can tell, WG also take it as an abl., but construed with ā́in the sense of “all the way to” (a marginal, but certainly attested, construction in the RV). There is nothing impossible about either of these interpr., but I do not see what they would mean in context, and neither Ge nor WG give much help in that regard. For me the most appealing attempt to wring sense from this is Hoffmann’s (Injunk. 187). As in Ge’s alternative, Hoffmann takes góḥ as a gen. in an elliptical expression, but with the gapped item a second object to bhárati: “Herbei bringt der Kraftschnaubende (seine) Eltern, herbei (das) der Kuh.” This makes good sense of the structure of the pāda (fitting better with Old’s pavpα scheme, since α would now be grammatically parallel to a). So what is the “das” in Hoffmann’s tr.? He suggests ‘milk’ or similar, though not with a great deal of conviction. The publ. tr. supplies ‘milk’ as a possible metaphor for ‘rain’, and given the roaring winds of pāda d, I think rain is quite likely the gapped object, since ‘cow’ can be used of rain-bearing clouds. It also now occurs to me that it might instead be the Maruts (“[those] of the cow”), since they are the sons of the cow Pṛśni, as noted, e.g., in V.52.16, the same hymn that has the Paruṣṇī River foam passage cited above (vs. 2). The Maruts would also fit with the violent roaring of the wind in d.
