+++
title = "02"

+++
This is a difficult verse to construe, primarily because of the anomalous yád that ends pāda a. It cannot (or should not) mark that pāda as a subordinate clause because the verb nakṣathaḥ is unaccented. But if it is taken as marking what immediately follows as a subordinate clause, this is awkward at best, because the gen. phrase of b should simply specify the gen. átyasya in a. The Ge (/WG) solution is to supply an acc. goal for nakṣathaḥ (“Schnelligkeit”), which is picked up by the yád and the following genitive phrase: “reach (the speed) of the steed, which (speed) (is) of the …” Old suggests that the yád that should subordinate pāda d has simply been stuck in early at the end of pāda a for metrical reasons -- an unlikely tyro’s error for a skilled poet like Agastya and an interpretational hypothesis that essentially tells us that all bets are off in Rigvedic syntax. This is not a worthy representative of Old’s usual acumen. Re suggests either the Ge solution or an anticipation of the yád of c.

There is a much simpler solution, which avoids these syntactic contortions and also avoids the need to supply an acc. goal with nakṣathaḥ or to allow áva √nakṣ to take a goal in the genitive. The solution is to take yád (/yát) as the substantivized neuter NA sg. of the present participle to √i ‘go’ (‘going’ à ‘movement’); for a similar interpr. see āyát in III.55.8 and also vs. 3c below. It is the goal of the verb, and the genitives of ab are dependent on it; there is then no syntactic break between the pādas.

Contra Ge, I do not think that the first member of vípatman- is ví- ‘bird’, but, with Gr, etc., the preverb ví-. The lexeme ví √pat is found elsewhere, incl. in an Agastya hymn I.168.6.

Ge (sim. Gr, WG) suggests that the referent of the genitives is the Sonnenrosse or Dadhikrāvan. This does not fit spatially with the áva ‘down’ of áva nakṣathaḥ. I think rather of the ritual fire: Agni is often compared to an átya-; ‘of wide flight’ would well describe the movements of the newly kindled fire; although I could not identify an unambiguous example of nárya- referring to Agni, ‘belong to men, manly’ is a reasonable description of his role; as is práyajyu- ‘foremost at the sacrifice’, which is applied to Agni at III.6.2. Reference to the ritual fire also makes sense in the context of the second hemistich where Dawn escorts the Aśvins to the sacrifice and a ritual officiant (to be supplied) solemnly invokes (ī́ṭṭe) them. The root √īḍ is essentially restricted to such ritual situations.

