+++
title = "03"

+++
The construction of this vs. is, if anything, even more challenging than the previous one, at least in its second half. As noted in the publ. intro., the first half concerns the favorite paradox of the “cooked” milk coming from the raw cow. My only deviation from the standard tr. is to take account of the odd position of áva in b, which I take to signal a transition from a general statement about the paradoxical nature of milk to a particular statement about the ritual situation. I re-supply adhattam with áva, but here it refers to the deposit of the ritual milk down on the ritual ground.

The problems lie in the 2nd hemistich, and the knottiest one is posed by the apparent mismatch between the case of the simile and its supposed correspondent in the frame. To allow Ge’s tr. to represent the standard, he takes yád in c as a neut. acc. referring to the milk of the previous hemistich and functioning as obj. to yajāte in d (roughly, “which (milk) the oblation-offerer sacrifices to you”). But the milk is also compared to the undoubted nominative phrase hvāró ná śúciḥ -- a discrepancy he attributes to “Der Nom. statt Akk. im Vergleich,” a false explanation that I hope I dispatched for good in my 1982 IIJ article on case disharmony in RVic similes (and which Thieme [KlSch 79-80 n. 4 = 1951: 8-9] also excoriates him for, though without an adequate alternative solution in my view). Another problem posed by this interpr. (even for those who deal with the simile in another way) is that it requires ‘milk’ to be the obj. of yájate with vām then an oblique case, but √yaj (without preverb) almost always takes an acc. of the divinity and an oblique case (generally instr.) of the offering substance. (Gr gives templates with acc. of the offering, but the passages supposedly conforming to them are few and far between.) Again, a more radical approach to the text can eliminate the problems without compromising the grammar. I suggest that yájate in d is not the verb of the rel. clause introduced by yád in c, but starts a new cl., consisting only of yájate havíṣmān -- a simple statement ending a complex verse. The verb is accented because it opens its clause. What precedes in cd is a nominal clause, with ‘milk’ as subject. It is possible to assume that there is no verb at all but a gapped copula, but I actually think that there is a haplologized present participle *yát following the rel. prn. yád (hence yád

*yád), again, as in vs. 2a, the neut. N/A pres. participle of √i ‘go’. Assuming a
haplologized monosyllable here fixes the meter, making a 10-syllable line into a proper Triṣṭubh, with an opening of 5 and a fine break and cadence. Hence, the milk “which (yád) is going (*yát) within (antár) the wooden cups (vanínaḥ).” With milk as a nominative subject, the nominative simile is grammatically impeccable, without (in the mode of Thieme [/WG]) having to apply it to the havíṣmān, which does not work well. I believe that the “blazing twisting” entity is an image of a snake, but refers to the snaking flames of fire, going into the woods. Thus vanínaḥ is read with both frame and simile. In the publ. tr. “is (now) going” should be marked with an asterisk.

