+++
title = "05"

+++
Yet another near impossible verse.

The standard tr. take gór óheṇa as a phrase (e.g., Ge “durch Anpreisung der Kuh(milch)”). This interpr. is favored by the adjacency of the two words and even more by the retroflexion in óheṇa, which must be triggered by the final -r or gór and speaks for a close syntactic bond. Nonetheless, in the publ. tr. I construe góḥ with dānā́ya (“for the giving of a cow”), in part because pāda d (in my interpr.) identifies the poet as lacking cattle and in part because “by praise of the cow” doesn’t make much sense as a way to attract the Aśvins. However, the close sandhi of gór óheṇa gives me pause, and I might change the publ. tr. to “With a laud of the cow might I turn you here for giving.” Thieme gives a complex, sensitive, and in many way appealing treatment of this vs. in KZ 92 (1978): 40-42. In the first hemistich he takes dānā́ya as ambiguous, between “for (our) giving (to you)” and “for (your) giving (to us).” The ambiguity is also reflected in his double reading of góróheṇa: with a division gó róheṇa (already suggested by Pischel), this can mean “by the rising of the milk” and refer to the boiling up of the milk offered to the Aśvins in the Pravargya ritual. With a division gór óheṇa it simply means “mit dem Ruf eines Rinde” and refers to the loud cry with which Bhujyu summoned the Aśvins. Given Agastya’s seemingly limitless verbal trickery, Thieme’s suggested double readings are certainly possible, though I wonder if gór óheṇa needs to be confined to the simile, rather than referring to the cry with which we attract the Aśvins.

The second hemistich is more contested. Most tr. take kṣoṇī́as dual acc, which it of course can be, with the fem. adj. mā́hinā the subject and wanting a referent: e.g., Ge (/WG) ‘help’ (ūtíḥ). I instead follow Thieme (and in fact Gr) in taking kṣoṇī́here as nom. sg., and I read mā́hinā in two ways, as nom. sg. with kṣoṇī́ and dual acc. with vām (Thieme only the latter). Thieme also takes all of the 2nd hemistich as referring to the story of Bhujyu, the Aśvins’ client whom they saved from the sea. This allows him to take apáḥ as ablative sg.: “a cry from the water,” where Bhujyu was languishing. I believe the Bhujyu reference is confined to pāda b, though Agastya’s extensive treatment of the story in nearby I.182.5-7 gives me pause and might lead me to reconsider. Meanwhile I take apáḥ in c as gen. sg., as in 4b. Note the similarity between 4b apó ná kṣódaḥ and 5c apáḥ kṣoṇī́. In my interpr., pāda c is parenthetical, describing the noise that attends the Aśvins’ journey, produced both by their quick progress in the chariot and by the cries of us ritualists seeking to bring them to us. I then take d as a return to the 1st sg. speaker of a(b) and supply the verb from pāda a, ā́… vavṛtīya “might I turn you here.” My interpr.

depends crucially on Thieme’s ingenious (and to me convincing) analysis of ákṣu- as ‘without cattle’, formed in opposition to kṣumánt- ‘having cattle’, and containing an underlying *p(a)śu-. (See EWA s.v. ákṣu2 ; Mayrhofer accepts this analysis.) The standard tr. are founded on ákṣu- ‘net’, found several times in the AV; Thieme allows the possibility of a second reading with the ‘net’ word, which seems a bit stretched.

