+++
title = "06"

+++
As noted in the publ. intro., I take the 2nd hemistich as a punning depiction of the poet’s patron, anchored by two adjacent and rhyming verbs that have double readings, préṣad véṣad. The former is generally taken as the s-aor. subj. to √prī ‘please’ (Wh Rts, Gr, Narten [176], as well as the standard tr.), but it could also be assigned to prá √iṣ ‘send forth’ (pace Re, who explicitly rejects this analysis) and refer to the praiṣa- ‘ritual prompt’, a technical term in the later ritual but already reflected in the RV, at least in my view (cf. purupraíṣa- I.145.3 and comm. ad loc.). I think that both readings are present. Those who assign the form to √prī interpret it as an unusual intransitive / reflexive (“becomes pleased, pleases himself”), in contrast to the standard transitive use of the active forms of this root. But this is unnecessary.

The subject is the ritual patron (sūrí-), whose function is to distribute largesse to the poet and priests. It is used without object here to enable both the √prī and the prá √iṣ senses to be actualized. The same goes for the next verb véṣat. This latter verb is generally taken also as an s-aor. subjunctive, to √vī ‘pursue’ (e.g., Gr, Narten [246], as well as the standard tr.), and I agree that this is one of its readings. But I would also take it as an injunc. to √viṣ ‘toil’, two forms of which are found nearby (I.178.2, 181.6). The two injunctive forms “gives the prompt and toils” express activities strictly limited to ritual performance; the two subjunctives “will please and will pursue” remain tied to the ritual but express its larger goals: “will please (the poet and priests) and will pursue (the gods).” Pāda d expresses the redistribution of goods that characterizes the Vedic ritual system. The patron acquires goods, hence the ā́… dade ‘has taken’; in this case the vā́ja- ‘prize’ must be the ‘abundance’ (púraṃdhi-) sent by the Aśvins in b. The gods give these goods in response to the praises produced by the poets. The patron then distributes these acquisitions to his clients, here the ritual functionaries who prompted the gods’ gifts in the first place. There are several possible grammatical analyses of mahé, but the dominant mahé is the dat. sg. to the athematic stem máh-.

Given the patronage situation depicted, I take it as short for mahé *rā́dhase “for great (generosity),” as in I.139.6, II.41.6=VI.45.27, VIII.2.29, 24.10, 45.24, 64.12, 93.16.

