+++
title = "02"

+++
If my new parsing of the syntax of vs. 1 is correct, these two verses are structurally parallel, with a relative/subordinate clause in a, the main clause in b, and a further subordinate clause, esp. dependent on the main clause, in cd.

Note the phonological trick, where (ā́) yád dhá(rī) opens 2a, apparently matching yád dha of 1c (which in turn shows dha for ha, found in the grammatically different rel. clause yó ha in 1a). The verse ends with more alliteration: d púra(ḥ)...

puru- ... pūrvī́ḥ.

The meaning of vívrata-, several times of Indra’s horses, but also with a few other referents, isn’t entirely clear, because it depends on which of the many value of ví to assume. I favor ‘having separate commandments’, that is, acting independently but each in obedience to Indra, but it could also mean ‘without commandments’ (which must underlie Ge’s ‘widerspenstige’ [stubborn], followed by Hoffmann [but with ?]).

The c pāda lacks a caesura and in its place has a somewhat bizarre compound, voc. aviharyata-kratu-. The second member is clear, and the whole must be a bahuvrīhi. The first member appears to contain the well-attested adj. haryatá- ‘gladdening’, but this presents certain problems: the present háryati does not appear with the preverb ví and it is difficult to construct an appropriate meaning, esp. one that would harmonize with krátu- ‘resolve’. Possibly, with double negation via a + ví, “whose resolve is not undelightful” - not a particularly compelling possibility.

Nonetheless, this derivation seems the path of least resistance and is probably responsible for Ge’s “dessen Rat nicht verschmäht wird” and WG’s “… nicht unbeliebt ist” (possibly also Hoffmann’s “… nicht zu unterschätzen ist” - it’s hard to tell). But all of these must take the -haryata- in a passive sense, although the simplex adjective never has that value.

I think it’s likely that the compound involves some complex word play, scrambling and recombining the (d)hárī and ví(vratā) of pāda a. Despite the ad hoc explanations required, I’m inclined to consider the -viharyata- somehow a derivative of ví √hvṛ ‘deflect, swerve, overturn’, a well-established idiom. (Re’s “dont le pouvoir est incontrariable” seems to reflect this.) Two negated nominal derivatives of this lexeme are found in the RV: ávihruta- ‘unswerving’, jpb: ‘not overturned’ (V.66.2, X.170.1) and ávihvarant- jpb: ‘not overturning’ (IV.36.2). Unfortunately the morphological details are not going to be easy. Accounting for the loss of the v in a putative *avihvaryata- is not so difficult: it can be ascribed to dissimilation, in combination with the word play on (d)hárī just mentioned. But what about the rest of the word. For the suffix -ata- I can only invoke the (small) class of -ata- adjectives with full-grade root syllable of the type darśatá- ‘(lovely) to be seen’, yajatá- ‘worthy of the sacrifice’, and the aforementioned haryatá- ‘delightful’. As for the intermediate -y- between root syllable and ending, I again invoke the play on (d)hárī, with the -y- representing the sandhi of -ī- before the suffix -ata-. If word play is indeed involved here, it’s possible that a second reading of the first member could be “not without his fallow bays” and the whole compound means “who has no resolve without his fallow bays.” I am fully aware of what a house of cards this is and only sketch these scenarios because I think Nodhas is capable of such manipulations. I do think it possible, however, that the lack of caesura and the problematic compound are connected and that the transmitted text is not what Nodhas originally composed. It should be noted that the word division yénā viharyatakrato is also a possibility, but this doesn’t help either with the lack of caesura or the analysis of the compound.

