+++
title = "04"

+++
A curious verse. It begins conventionally enough, with a plea to Indra to favor us “though these days” (ebhíḥ … áhabhiḥ). Which days is not clear, but I assume it means “now.” The verse then turns towards the moral sphere: the peoples (kṣitáyaḥ) who are durmitrá- ‘having bad allies/alliances’ (or possibly ‘bad allies’) are purifying themselves (pávante). This pāda presents a number of problems: not only whether durmitrá- is a bahuvrīhi or tatpuruṣa (opinion is divided; I take it as the former; see also comm. ad VII.18.15), but also whether the kṣitáyaḥ are intrinsically our enemies or are members of our larger community who have fallen into an evil state. kṣitáyaḥ are ordinarily presented either positively or neutrally, but see III.18.1, where they are purudrúhaḥ ‘possessing many deceptions’, so an intrinsically hostile reading is possible (if, in my opinion, less likely). If here they are intrinsically hostile, the point may be that if they’re sprucing themselves up, we had better get to work on it as well, to meet the challenge of our enemies. If they are not our sworn enemies but peoples with whom we have dealings (or who we ourselves actually are), is it that they are purifying themselves of their bad allies/alliances, and therefore are worthy of Indra’s aid? Varuṇa, as if evoked by his partner Mitra in durmitrá-, then makes his appearance, noting untruth and releasing us from it. As was stated in the intro., Varuṇa’s presence is unexpected here. I now wonder if the hymn is specialized for a particular ritual context (signaled by “these days”), perhaps the Varuṇapraghāsa. A purificatory period (like that described in pāda b) might be appropriate then. For this reason I favor an interpretation of pāda b in which the kṣitáyaḥ are identified with, or associated with, us.

