+++
title = "06"

+++
The rendering of ná vindhate in the publ. tr. is opaque. By “does not get enough” I meant something like “produces in superfluity” -- from Vatsa’s point of view, there can never be enough praises for the Aśvins.

The sense relation between the yád clauses of ab and the main clause in c is not clear. I think the idea is that even when the Aśvins are preoccupied with some other activity, Vatsa keeps praising them on the assumption that they will pay attention at some point.

I am also a bit unclear on how pāda d fits with the rest. I think that it reinforces pāda c; that is, Vatsa keeps producing hymns because he knows that the Aśvins ultimately come to someone who offers them sacrifice (here represented by the havís- ‘oblation’). But it could instead mean that Vatsa is wasting his time, because the Aśvins go for the oblation, not the praise. This seems less likely, esp.

since both praise and oblation are offered to the Aśvins in the next vs. ### 07
This new tṛca opens as the hymn does (1a): ā́nūnám, followed by a form of aśvín-. The 2nd vs. of the tṛca (8) also opens with ā́nūnám.

Ge (also Lü 362) supplies a form of ‘speech’ with vāmáyā, obviously as part of the seer’s ritual offering to the Aśvins. But vāmá- generally expresses the valuable thing that the ritualist receives from the god(s) in exchange for his ritual service, and I have taken it this way here, with (loosely) an instr. of price. I do not have an explanation for its fem. gender, however. There are no other occurrences of a fem. in

-ā́to this adjective; most forms are masc. or neut, and the other fem. forms are in -ī́.

The honeyed soma and hot milk of vs. 4 return here.

Ge (also Lü), flg. Ludwig, takes átharvaṇi rather bizarrely as a nominative, but there seems no reason not to interpr. it as the loc. it appears to be (so, e.g., Old).

Nor does there seem any reason not to take it as the name of a priest, as it is elsewhere (pace Sāy., Old). I take it as a loc. absol. without an overt participle marking it.
